Chapter 2
Instruction Model
This chapter provides an overview of the VLE instruction model, including the following:
   • Section 2.1, “VLE Storage Addressing”
   • Section 2.2, “VLE Compatibility with the Standard Architecture”
   • Section 2.3, “Branch Operation Instructions”
   • Section 2.4, “Integer Instructions”
   • Section 2.5, “Storage Control Instructions”
   • Section 2.6, “Additional Categories Available in VLE”

2.1        VLE Storage Addressing
A program references memory using the effective address (EA) the processor computes when it executes
a memory access or branch instruction (or certain other instructions defined in the VEA and OEA) or when
it fetches the next sequential instruction.

2.1.1         Data Storage Addressing Modes
Table 2-1 lists data storage addressing modes supported by VLE. Instruction forms are described in
Appendix A, “VLE Instruction Formats.”
                                     Table 2-1. Data Storage Addressing Modes

             Mode                                                        Description

Base+16-bit displacement         The 16-bit D field is sign-extended and added to the contents of the GPR designated by rA
(D-form, 32-bit format)          or to zero if rA = 0 to produce the EA.

Base+8-bit displacement          The 8-bit D8 field is sign-extended and added to the contents of the GPR designated by rA
(D8-form,32-bit format)          or to zero if rA = 0 to produce the EA.

Base+scaled 4-bit displacement The 4-bit SD4 field zero-extended, scaled (shifted left) according to the size of the operand,
(SD4-form, 16-bit format)      and added to the contents of the GPR designated by rX to produce the EA. (Note that rX = 0
                               is not a special case.

Base+Index                       The GPR contents designated by rB are added to the GPR contents designated by rA or to
(X-form, 32-bit format)          zero if rA = 0 to produce the EA.




                      Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                    2-1
Instruction Model


2.1.2         Instruction Storage Addressing Modes
Table 2-2 lists instruction storage addressing modes supported by VLE.
                                   Table 2-2. Instruction Storage Addressing Modes

                Mode                                                         Description

Taken BD24-form branch instructions The 24-bit BD24 field is concatenated on the right with 0b0, sign-extended, and then
(32-bit instruction format)         added to the address of the branch instruction.

Taken B15-form branch instructions    The 15-bit BD15 field is concatenated on the right with 0b0, sign-extended, and then
(32-bit instruction format)           added to the address of the branch instruction to form the EA of the next instruction.

Take BD8-form branch instructions     The 8-bit BD8 field is concatenated on the right with 0b0, sign-extended, and then added
(16-bit instruction format)           to the address of the branch instruction to form the EA of the next instruction.

Sequential instruction fetching (or   The value 4 [2] is added to the address of the current 32-bit [16-bit] instruction to form
non-taken branch instructions)        the EA of the next instruction. If the address of the current instruction is
                                      0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFC [0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFE] in 64-bit mode or
                                      0xFFFF_FFFC [0xFFFF_FFFE] in 32-bit mode, the address of the next sequential
                                      instruction is undefined.

Any branch instruction with LK = 1    The value 4 is added to the address of the current branch instruction and the result is
(32-bit instruction format)           placed into the LR. If the address of the current instruction is
                                      0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFC in 64-bit mode o r0xFFFF_FFFC in 32-bit mode, the result
                                      placed into the LR is undefined.

Branch se_bl. se_blrl. se_bctrl       The value 2 is added to the address of the current branch instruction and the result is
instructions (16-bit instruction      placed into the LR. If the address of the current instruction is
format)                               0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFE in 64-bit mode or 0xFFFF_FFFE in 32-bit mode, the result
                                      placed into the LR is undefined.


2.1.2.1         Misaligned, Mismatched, and Byte-Ordering Instruction Storage
                Exceptions
A misaligned instruction storage exception occurs when an implementation that supports VLE attempts to
execute an instruction that is not 32-bit aligned and the VLE storage attribute is not set for the page that
corresponds to the effective address of the instruction. The attempted execution can be the result of a
branch instruction that has bit 62 of the target address set or the result of an rfi, se_rfi, rfci, se_rfci, rfdi,
se_rfdi, rfmci, or se_rfmci instruction that has bit 62 set in the respective save/restore register. If a
misaligned instruction storage exception is detected and no higher priority exception exists, an instruction
storage interrupt occurs, setting SRR0 to the misaligned address for which execution was attempted.
A mismatched instruction storage exception occurs when an implementation that supports VLE attempts
to execute an instruction that crosses a page boundary for which the first page has the VLE storage attribute
set and the second page has the VLE storage attribute bit cleared. If a mismatched instruction storage
exception is detected and no higher priority exception exists, an instruction storage interrupt occurs, setting
SRR0 to the misaligned address for which execution was attempted.
A byte-ordering instruction storage exception occurs when an implementation that supports VLE attempts
to execute an instruction that has the VLE storage attribute set and the E (Endian) storage attribute set for
the page that corresponds to the effective address of the instruction. If a byte-ordering instruction storage
exception is detected and no higher priority exception exists, an instruction storage interrupt occurs, setting
SRR0 to the address for which execution was attempted.

                       Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
2-2                                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                Instruction Model


2.1.2.2       VLE Exception Syndrome Bits
VLE defines the following bits to facilitate VLE exception handling, as described in the EREF:
  • ESR[VLEMI] is set when an exception and subsequent interrupt is caused by the execution or
      attempted execution of an instruction that resides in memory with the VLE storage attribute set.
  • ESR[MIF] is set when an instruction storage interrupt is caused by a misaligned instruction storage
      exception, or when an instruction TLB error interrupt was caused by a TLB miss on the second half
      of a misaligned 32-bit instruction.
  • ESR[BO] is set when an instruction storage interrupt is caused by a mismatched instruction storage
      exception or a byte-ordering instruction storage exception.
                                          NOTE (Programming)
                When an instruction TLB error interrupt occurs as the result of an
                instruction TLB miss on the second half of a 32-bit VLE instruction that is
                aligned to only 16-bits, SRR0 points to the first half of the instruction and
                ESR[MIF] is set. Any other status posted as a result of the TLB miss (such
                as MAS register updates) reflects the page corresponding to the second half
                of the instruction that caused the instruction TLB miss.

2.2       VLE Compatibility with the Standard Architecture
This chapter addresses the relationship between VLE and the standard architecture.

2.2.1        Overview
VLE uses the same semantics as other Power ISA instructions. Due to the limited instruction encoding
formats, VLE instructions typically support reduced immediate fields and displacements, and not all
operations defined by the standard architecture are encoded in VLE. The design criteria are to capture all
useful operations, with most frequent operations given priority. Immediate fields and displacements are
provided to cover the majority of ranges encountered in embedded control code. Instructions are encoded
in either a 16- or 32-bit format, and these may be freely intermixed.
VLE instructions cannot access FPRs. VLE instructions use GPRs and SPRs with the following
limitations:
    • Most VLE instructions using 16-bit formats are limited to addressing GPR0–GPR7 and
        GPR24–GPR31. Move instructions are provided to transfer register contents between these
        registers and GPR8–GPR23.
    • VLE compare and bit test instructions using the 16-bit formats implicitly set their results in CR0.
VLE instruction encodings are generally different than instructions defined by the standard architecture,
except that most instructions falling within primary opcode 31 are encoded identically and have identical
semantics unless they affect or access a resource unsupported by VLE.

2.2.2        VLE Processor and Storage Control Extensions
This section describes additional functionality to support VLE.

                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      2-3
Instruction Model


2.2.2.1         Instruction Extensions
This section describes extensions to support VLE operations. Because instructions may reside on a
half-word boundary, bit 62 is not masked by instructions that read an instruction address from a register,
such as LR, CTR, or a save/restore register 0 that holds an instruction address:
The instruction set defined by the standard architecture is modified to support halfword instruction
addressing, as follows:
   • Return from interrupt instructions (rfi, rfci, rfdi, and rfmci) no longer mask bit 62 of the respective
       save/restore register 0. The destination address is SRR0[0–62] || 0b0, CSRR0[0–62] || 0b0,
       DSRR0[0–62] || 0b0, MCSRR0[0–62] || 0b0, respectively.
   • bclr, bclrl, bcctr, and bcctrl no longer mask bit 62 of LR or CTR. The destination address is
       LR[0–62] || 0b0 or CTR[0–62] || 0b0.

2.2.2.2         MMU Extensions
VLE operation is indicated by the VLE storage page attribute. When this attribute is set, instruction fetches
from that page are decoded and processed as VLE instructions. See the EREF.
When instructions execute from a page whose VLE storage attribute is set, the processor is in VLE mode.

2.2.3         VLE Limitations
VLE instruction fetches are valid only when performed in a big-endian mode. Attempting to fetch an
instruction in a little-endian mode from a page with the VLE storage attribute set causes an instruction
storage byte-ordering exception.
Support for concurrent modification and execution of VLE instructions is implementation-dependent.

2.3        Branch Operation Instructions
This section describes branch instructions that can be executed when a processor is in VLE mode. It also
describes the registers that support them.

2.3.1         Branch Processor Registers
The following registers support branch operations:
   • Section 2.3.1.1, “Condition Register (CR)”
   • Section 2.3.1.2, “Link Register (LR)”
   • Section 2.3.1.3, “Count Register (CTR)”




                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
2-4                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                          Instruction Model


2.3.1.1         Condition Register (CR)
The CR reflects the result of certain operations and provides a mechanism for testing (and branching).
VLE uses the entire CR, as described in the EREF, but some comparison operations and all branch
instructions are limited to using CR0–CR3. The full UISA-defined CR field and logical operations are
provided, however.
CR bits are grouped into eight 4-bit fields, CR field 0 (CR0) ... CR field 7 (CR7), which are set by
VLE-defined instructions in one of the following ways:
   • Specified CR fields can be set by a move to the CR from a GPR (mtcrf, mtocrf).
   • A specified CR field can be set by a move to the CR from another CR field (e_mcrf) or from
       XER[32–35] (mcrxr).
   • CR field 0 can be set as the implicit result of an integer instruction.
   • A specified CR field can be set as the result of an integer compare instruction.
   • CR field 0 can be set as the result of an integer bit test instruction.
Other instructions from implemented categories may also set bits in the CR in the same manner that they
would when not in VLE mode.
Instructions are provided to perform logical operations on individual CR bits and to test individual CR bits.
For all integer instructions in which the Rc bit is defined and set, and for e_add2i., e_and2i., and
e_and2is., the first three bits of CR field 0 (CR32:34) are set by signed comparison of the result to zero,
and the fourth bit of CR field 0 (CR[35]) is copied from the final state of XER[SO]. “Result” here refers
to the entire 64-bit value placed into the target register in 64-bit mode, and to bits 32–63 of the value placed
into the target register in 32-bit mode.
if (64-bit mode)
   then M I 0
   else M I 32
if       (target_register)M:63 < 0 then c I 0b100
else if (target_register)M:63 > 0 then c I 0b010
else                                     c I 0b001
CR0 I c || XERSO

If any portion of the result is undefined, the value placed into the first three bits of CR field 0 is undefined.
The bits of CR field 0 are interpreted as shown in Table 2-3.
                                          Table 2-3. CR0 Field Descriptions

    Bits Name                                                Description

     32    LT    Negative—The result is negative.

     33    GT    Positive—The result is positive.

     34    EQ    Zero—The result is 0.

     35    SO    Summary overflow—This is a copy of the contents of XER[SO] at the completion of the instruction.




                     Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                2-5
Instruction Model


2.3.1.1.1           Condition Register Setting for Compare Instructions
For compare instructions, a CR field specified by the BF operand for the e_cmph, e_cmphl, e_cmpi, and
e_cmpli instructions, or CR0 for the se_cmpl, e_cmp16i, e_cmph16i, e_cmphl16i, e_cmpl16i, se_cmp,
se_cmph, se_cmphl, se_cmpi, and se_cmpli instructions, is set to reflect the result of the comparison. The
CR field bits are interpreted as shown below. A complete description of how the bits are set is given in the
instruction descriptions and the EREF.
Condition register bits settings for compare instructions are interpreted as shown in Table 2-4.
                          Table 2-4. Condition Register Settings for Compare Instructions

    CR Bit1                                                     Description

4×BF + 32 Less than (LT). For signed integer compare, (rA) or (rX) < sci8, SI, (rB), or (rY).
          For unsigned integer compare, (rA) or (rX) <u sci8, UI, UI5, (rB), or (rY).

4×BF + 33 Greater than (GT). For signed integer compare, (rA) or (rX) > sci8, SI, (rB), or (rY).
          For unsigned integer compare, (rA) or (rX) >u sci8, UI, UI5, (rB), or (rY).

4×BF + 34 Equal (EQ). For integer compare, (rA) or (rX) = sci8, UI, UI5, SI, (rB), or (rY).

4×BF + 35 Summary overflow (SO). For integer compare, this is a copy of XER[SO] at the completion of the instruction.
1   e_cmpi, and e_cmpli instructions have a BF32 field instead of a BF field; for these instructions, BF32 should be substituted
    for BF in the table.


2.3.1.1.2           Condition Register Setting for the Bit Test Instruction
The Bit Test Immediate instruction, se_btsti, also sets CR field 0. See the instruction description and also
the EREF.

2.3.1.2          Link Register (LR)
VLE instructions use the LR as defined in the UISA, although VLE defines a subset of the variants defined
for conditional branches involving the LR.

2.3.1.3          Count Register (CTR)
VLE instructions use the CTR as defined in the UISA, although VLE defines a subset of the variants
defined for conditional branches involving the CTR.

2.3.2          Branch Instructions
The sequence of instruction execution can be changed by the branch instructions. Because VLE
instructions must be aligned on half-word boundaries, the low-order bit of the generated branch target
address is forced to 0 by the processor in performing the branch.
The branch instructions compute the EA of the target in one of the following ways, as described in
Section 2.1.2, “Instruction Storage Addressing Modes.”
   1. Adding a displacement to the address of the branch instruction.
   2. Using the address contained in the LR (Branch to Link Register [and Link]).


                        Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
2-6                                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                               Instruction Model


    3. Using the address contained in the CTR (Branch to Count Register [and Link]).
Branching can be conditional or unconditional, and the return address can optionally be provided. If the
return address is to be provided (LK = 1), the EA of the instruction following the branch instruction is
placed into the LR after the branch target address has been computed; this is done regardless of whether
the branch is taken.
In branch conditional instructions, the BI32 or BI16 instruction field specifies the CR bit to be tested. For
32-bit instructions using BI32, CR[32–47] (corresponding to bits in CR0:CR3) may be specified. For
16-bit instructions using BI16, only CR[32–35] (bits within CR0) may be specified.
In branch conditional instructions, the BO32 or BO16 field specifies the conditions under which the branch
is taken and how the branch is affected by or affects the CR and CTR. Note that VLE instructions also have
different encodings for the BO32 and BO16 fields than in the UISA-defined BO field.
If the BO32 field specifies that the CTR is to be decremented, in 64-bit mode CTR[0–63] are decremented,
and in 32-bit mode CTR[32–63] are decremented. If BO16 or BO32 specifies a condition that must be
TRUE or FALSE, that condition is obtained from the contents of CR[BI32+32] or CR[BI16+32]. (Note
that CR bits are numbered 32–63. BI32 or BI16 refers to the condition register bit field in the branch
instruction encoding. For example, specifying BI32 = 2 refers to CR[34].)
For Table 2-5, let M = 0 in 64-bit mode and M = 32 in 32-bit mode.
Encodings for the BO32 field for VLE are shown in Table 2-5.
                                         Table 2-5. BO32 Field Encodings

                     BO32                                      Description

                      00    Branch if the condition is false.

                      01    Branch if the condition is true.

                      10    Decrement CTR[M–63], then branch if the decremented value ¦ 0

                      11    Decrement CTR[M–63], then branch if the decremented value = 0.

Encodings for the BO16 field for VLE are shown in Table 2-6.
                                         Table 2-6. BO16 Field Encodings

                                      BO16                     Description

                                        0      Branch if the condition is false.

                                        1      Branch if the condition is true.


2.3.3        System Linkage Instructions
The system linkage instructions enable the program to call on the system to perform a service and provide
a means by which the system can return from performing a service or from processing an interrupt. System
linkage instructions defined by VLE are identical in semantics to system linkage instructions defined in
the UISA and OEA, with the exception of the LEV field, but are encoded differently.



                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     2-7
Instruction Model


se_sc provides the same functionality as sc without the LEV field. se_rfi, se_rfci, se_rfdi, and se_rfmci
provide the same functionality as rfi, rfci, rfdi, and rfmci, respectively.

2.4        Integer Instructions
This section lists the integer instructions supported by VLE.

2.4.1         Integer Load Instructions
The integer load instructions compute the EA of the memory to be accessed as described in Section 2.1.1,
“Data Storage Addressing Modes.”
The byte, halfword, word, or doubleword in storage addressed by EA is loaded into rD or rZ.
VLE supports both big- and little-endian byte ordering for data accesses.
Some integer load instructions have an update form in which rA is updated with the EA. For these forms,
if rA¦0 and rA¦rD, the EA is placed into rA and the memory element (byte, halfword, word, or
doubleword) addressed by EA is loaded into rD. If rA = 0 or rA = rD, the instruction form is invalid. This
is the same behavior as specified for UISA load with update instructions.
The integer load instructions, lbzx, lbzux, lhzx, lhzux, lwzx, and lwzux, are available in VLE mode. The
mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these instructions are identical to those defined by the UISA. See
the EREF for the instruction definitions.
The integer load instructions, lwax, lwaux, ldx, and ldux, are available in VLE mode on 64-bit
implementations. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these instructions are identical to those in
the UISA. See the EREF for the instruction definitions.

2.4.2         Integer Load and Store with Byte Reversal Instructions
The integer load with byte reversal and store with byte reversal instructions, lhbrx, lwbrx, sthbrx, and
stwbrx, are available in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these instructions are
identical to those in the UISA. See the EREF for instruction definitions.

2.4.3         Integer Load and Store Multiple Instructions
The load/store multiple instructions have preferred forms; see the EREF. In the preferred forms storage
alignment satisfies the following rule.
    • The combination of the EA and rD (rS) is such that the low-order byte of GPR 31 is loaded (stored)
       from (into) the last byte of an aligned quadword in storage.

2.4.4         Integer Arithmetic Instructions
The integer arithmetic instructions use the contents of the GPRs as source operands and place results into
GPRs, into status bits in the XER, and into CR0.



                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
2-8                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                               Instruction Model


The integer arithmetic instructions treat source operands as signed integers unless an instruction is
explicitly identified as performing an unsigned operation.
The e_add2i. instruction and other arithmetic instructions with Rc=1 set the first three bits of CR0 to
characterize the result placed into the target register. In 64-bit mode, these bits are set by signed
comparison of the result to 0. In 32-bit mode, these bits are set by signed comparison of the low-order 32
bits of the result to zero.
e_addic[.] and e_subfic[.] always set CA to reflect the carry out of bit 0 in 64-bit mode and out of bit 32
in 32-bit mode.
The integer arithmetic instructions, add[.], addo[.], addc[.], addco[.], adde[.], addeo[.], addme[.],
addmeo[.], addze[.], addzeo[.], divw[.], divwo[.], divwu[.], divwuo[.], mulhw[.], mulhwu[.], mullw[.],
mullwo[.] neg[.], nego[.], subf[.], subfo[.] subfe[.], subfeo[.], subfme[.], subfmeo[.], subfze[.],
subfzeo[.], subfc[.], and subfco[.] are available in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics
for these instructions are identical to those in the UISA; see the EREF for the instruction definitions.
The integer arithmetic instructions, mulld[.], mulldo[.], mulhd[.], muldu[.], divd[.], divdo[.], divdu[.],
and divduo[.] are available in VLE mode on 64-bit implementations. The mnemonics, decoding, and
semantics for those instructions are identical to these in the UISA; see the EREF for the instruction
definitions.

2.4.5        Integer Trap Instructions
The integer trap instruction tw is available in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for
this instruction are identical to that in the UISA; see the EREF for the instruction definition.
The integer trap instruction td is available in VLE mode on 64-bit implementations. The mnemonic,
decoding, and semantics for the td instruction are identical to those in the UISA; see the EREF for the
instruction definitions.

2.4.6        Integer Select Instruction
The Integer Select instruction isel provides a means to select one of two registers and place the result in a
destination register under the control of a predicate value supplied by a CR bit.
The isel is available in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for this instruction are
identical to that in the UISA; see the EREF for the instruction definition.

2.4.7        Integer Logical, Bit, and Move Instructions
The logical instructions perform bit-parallel operations on 64-bit operands. The bit instructions manipulate
a bit, or create a bit mask, in a register. The move instructions move a register or an immediate value into
a register.
The X-form logical instructions with Rc=1, the SCI8-form logical instructions with Rc=1, the RR-form
logical instructions with Rc=1, the e_and2i. instruction, and the e_and2is. instruction set the first three
bits of CR field 0 as the arithmetic instructions described in Section 2.4.4, “Integer Arithmetic


                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     2-9
Instruction Model


Instructions.” (Also see Section 2.3.1.1, “Condition Register (CR).”) The logical instructions do not
change the SO, OV, and CA bits in the XER.
The integer logical instructions, and[.], or[.], xor[.], nand[.], nor[.], eqv[.], andc[.], orc[.], extsb[.],
extsh[.], cntlzw[.], and popcntb, are available in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics
for these instructions are identical to those in the UISA; see the EREF for instruction definitions.
The integer logical instructions, extsw[.] and cntlzd[.], are available in VLE mode on 64-bit
implementations. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these instructions are identical to those in
the UISA; see the EREF for instruction definitions.

2.5        Storage Control Instructions

2.5.1         Storage Synchronization Instructions
The memory synchronization instructions implemented by VLE are identical in semantics to those defined
in the VEA and OEA. The se_isync instruction is defined by VLE but has the same semantics as isync.
The load and reserve instruction lwarx and the store conditional instruction stwcx are available in VLE
mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those instructions are identical to those in the VEA;
see the EREF for instruction definitions.
The load and reserve instruction ldarx and the store conditional instruction stdcx are available in VLE
mode on 64-bit implementations. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those instructions are
identical to those in the VEA; see the EREF for instruction definitions.
Memory barrier instructions, sync (msync) and mbar are available in VLE mode. The mnemonics,
decoding, and semantics for those instructions are identical to those in the VEA; see the EREF for
instruction definitions.
The wait instruction is available in VLE mode if the category Wait is implemented. The mnemonics,
decoding, and semantics for wait are identical to those in the VEA; see the EREF for the instruction
definition.

2.5.2         Cache Management Instructions
Cache management instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those defined in the VEA and OEA.
The cache management instructions, dcba, dcbf, dcbst, dcbt, dcbtst, dcbz, icbi, and icbt, are available
in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these instructions are identical to those in the
VEA; see the EREF instruction definitions.
dcbi is available in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for this instruction are identical
to those in the OEA; see the EREF for instruction definition.




                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
2-10                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                             Instruction Model


2.5.3        Cache Locking Instructions
Cache locking instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those defined by the OEA. If the cache
locking instructions are implemented in VLE, the embedded cache locking instructions must also be
implemented.
The cache locking instructions defined by the OEA, dcbtls, dcbtstls, dcblc, icbtls, and icblc are available
in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these instructions are identical to those
defined in the OEA; see the EREF for instruction definitions.

2.5.4        TLB Management Instructions
The TLB management instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those defined by the OEA.
The OEA-defined TLB management instructions, tlbre, tlbwe, tlbivax, tlbsync, and tlbsx, are available
in VLE mode. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these instructions are identical to those in the
OEA. See the EREF for instruction definitions.
Instructions and resources from category Embedded.MMU Type FSL are available if that category is
implemented.

2.5.5        Instruction Alignment and Byte Ordering
Only big-endian instruction memory is supported when executing from a page of VLE instructions.
Attempting to fetch VLE instructions from a page marked as little-endian generates an instruction storage
interrupt byte-ordering exception.

2.6       Additional Categories Available in VLE
Processors that implement VLE may implement instructions and resources from categories other than
Base and Embedded. User documentation for each processor core indicates which of these may be
implemented. These instructions are described in the EREF.
Such categories include those for which all the instructions in the category use primary opcode 4 or
primary opcode 31, as listed below:
    • Move assist. Move assist instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those defined in the
       UISA. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those instructions are identical to those in the
       UISA; see the EREF for the instruction definitions.
    • Vector. Vector instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those defined in the UISA. The
       mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those instructions are identical to those in the UISA; see
       the EREF for the instruction definitions.
    • Signal processing engine (SPE). SPE instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those
       defined in the UISA. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those instructions are identical
       to those in the UISA; see the EREF for the instruction definitions.
    • Embedded floating-point. Embedded floating-point instructions implemented by VLE are identical
       to those defined in the UISA.The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those instructions are
       identical to those in the UISA; see the EREF for the instruction definitions.

                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                  2-11
Instruction Model


       •   Legacy move assist. Legacy move assist instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those
           defined in the UISA. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those instructions are identical
           to those in the UISA; see the EREF for instruction definitions.
       •   External PID. External process ID instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those defined
           by the OEA. Semantics for those instructions are identical to those in the OEA; see the EREF for
           the instruction definitions.
       •   Embedded performance monitor. Embedded performance monitor instructions implemented by
           VLE are identical to those defined by the OEA. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those
           instructions are identical to those in the OEA; see the EREF for the instruction definitions.
       •   Processor control. Processor control instructions implemented by VLE are identical to those
           defined by the OEA. The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for those instructions are identical
           to those in the OEA; see the EREF for the instruction definitions.




                      Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
2-12                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor