Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter describes computation modes, document conventions, a processor overview, instruction
formats, storage addressing, and instruction addressing for the variable length encoding (VLE)
programming model.

1.1       Overview
VLE is a re-encoding of much of the Power instruction set using both 16- and 32-bit instruction formats.
VLE is defined as a supplement to the Power ISA. Code pages using VLE encoding or non-VLE encoding
can be intermingled in a system providing focus on both high performance and code density.
Offering 16-bit versions of Power instructions makes it possible to implement more space-efficient binary
representations of applications for embedded environments where code density may affect overall system
cost and, to a somewhat lesser extent, performance. This set of alternate encodings is selected on a page
basis. A single storage attribute bit selects between standard instruction encodings and VLE instructions
for that page.
Instruction encodings in pages marked as VLE are either 16 or 32 bits long and are aligned on 16-bit
boundaries; therefore, all instruction pages marked as VLE must use big-endian byte ordering.
The programming model uses the same register set with both instruction set encodings, although some
registers are not accessible by VLE instructions using the 16-bit formats and not all condition register (CR)
fields are used by conditional branch instructions or instructions that access the CR executing from a VLE
instruction page. In addition, due to the more restrictive encodings imposed by VLE instruction formats,
immediate fields and displacements differ in size and use.
VLE additional instruction fields are described in the EREF.
Other than the requirement of big-endian byte ordering for instruction pages and the additional storage
attribute to identify whether the instruction page corresponds to a VLE section of code, VLE complies with
the memory model, register model, timer facilities, debug facilities, and interrupt/exception model defined
in the user instruction set architecture (UISA), the virtual environment architecture (VEA), and the
operating environment architecture (OEA). VLE instructions therefore execute in the same environment
as non-VLE instructions.

1.2       Documentation Conventions
Book VLE adheres to the documentation conventions defined in the EREF. Note, however, that this book
defines instructions that apply to the UISA, VEA, and OEA.




                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                   1-1
Introduction


1.2.1           Description of Instruction Operation
The RTL (register transfer language) descriptions in Book VLE conform to the conventions described in
the EREF.

1.3            Instruction Mnemonics and Operands
The description of each instruction includes the mnemonic and a formatted list of operands. VLE
instruction semantics are either identical or similar to those of other instructions in the architecture, as
described in the following:
    • Where the semantics, side-effects, and binary encodings are identical, the standard mnemonics and
        formats are used. Such unchanged instructions are listed (Table B-2 and Table B-3) and
        appropriately referenced, but the instruction definitions are not replicated in this book.
    • Where the semantics are similar but the binary encodings differ, the standard mnemonic is typically
        preceded with an e_ to denote a VLE instruction. To distinguish between similar instructions
        available in both 16- and 32-bit forms under VLE and standard instructions, VLE instructions
        encoded with 16 bits have an se_ prefix.
Examples of VLE-supported instructions are shown below:
   • stwx rS,rA,rB—Standard UISA instruction
   • e_stw rS,D(rA)—32-bit VLE instruction
   • se_stw rZ,SD4(rX)—16-bit VLE instruction




                    Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Programming Environments Manual, Rev. 0
1-2                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor