Chapter 4
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing
This section describes the e200 instruction pipeline and instruction timing information. The core is
partitioned into the following subsystems:
    • Instruction unit
    • Control unit
    • Integer unit
    • Load/store unit
    • Core interface

4.1       Overview of Operation
A block diagram of the e200 cores are shown in Figure 4-1. The instruction fetch unit prefetches
instructions from memory into the instruction buffers. The decode unit decodes each instruction and
generates information needed by the branch unit and the execution units.
The instruction fetch unit attempts to supply a constant stream of instructions to the execution pipeline. In
the e200z1 it does so by decoding and detecting branches early in the instruction buffer, making branch
predictions, and prefetching their branch targets into the instruction buffer. By prefetching the branch
targets early, some or all of the branch pipeline bubbles can be hidden from the execution pipeline.
The instruction issue unit attempts to issue a single instruction each cycle to one of the execution units.
Source operands for each of the instructions are provided from the GPRs or from the operand feed-forward
muxes. Data or resource hazards may create stall conditions which cause instruction issue to be stalled for
one or more cycles until the hazard is eliminated.
The execution units write the result of a finished instruction onto the proper result bus and into the
destination registers. The writeback logic retires an instruction when the instruction has finished
execution. Up to two results can be simultaneously written.




                           e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                   4-1
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing




                             OnCE/NEXUS
                                                                                      CPU
                        CONTROL LOGIC
                                                                                CONTROL LOGIC




                               MEMORY
                             MANAGEMENT                                               LR                        INTEGER
                                UNIT                                           SPR    CR         GPR           EXECUTION
                                                                                      CTR                         UNIT
                                                                                      XER
                   ADDRESS




                                                                                                                MULTIPLY
                                    INSTRUCTION BUS INTERFACE UNIT




                                                                               INSTRUCTION UNIT                   UNIT
                                                                           INSTRUCTION BUFFER
                                                                                                                            CONTROL
                             32
                   DATA




                                                                                                              EXTERNAL
                                                                                                                SPR
                                                                                                             INTERFACE       DATA
                             32




                                                                                                            (MTSPR/MFSPR)
                   CONTROL




                                                                                     PC     BRANCH
                                                                                    UNIT     UNIT

                                                                                     LOAD/
                             N




                                                                                     STORE
                                                                                      UNIT




                                                                         DATA BUS INTERFACE UNIT



                                                                               32           32         N
                                                                     ADDRESS        DATA         CONTROL



                                                                         Figure 4-1. e200z1 Block Diagram



4.1.1         Control Unit
The control unit coordinates the instruction fetch unit, branch unit, instruction decode unit, instruction
issue unit, completion unit and exception handling logic.


                                   e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-2                                                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                           Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


4.1.2        Instruction Unit
The instruction unit controls the flow of instructions to the instruction buffers and decode unit. A set of
instruction prefetch buffers allow the instruction unit to fetch instructions ahead of actual execution, and
serve to decouple memory and the execution pipeline.

4.1.3        Branch Unit
In the e200z1 the branch unit contains an four entry Branch Target Buffer (BTB) to accelerate execution
of branch instructions.
Conditional branches which are not taken execute in a single clock on e200. Branches with successful
target prefetching have an effective execution time of one clock in the e200z1. All other taken branches
have an execution time of two clocks on e200.

4.1.4        Instruction Decode Unit
The decode unit includes the instruction buffers. A single instruction can be decoded each cycle. The major
functions of the decode logic are:
   • Opcode decoding to determine the instruction class and resource requirements for each instruction
       being decoded.
   • Source and destination register dependency checking.
   • Execution unit assignment.
   • Determine any decode serializations, and inhibit subsequent instruction decoding.
The decode unit operates in a single processor clock cycle.

4.1.5        Exception Handling
The exception handling unit includes logic to handle exceptions, interrupts, and traps.

4.2       Execution Units
The core data execution units consist of the integer unit, and the load/store unit. Included in the execution
units section are the 32 general purpose registers (GPRs). Instructions with data dependencies begin
execution when all such dependencies are resolved.

4.2.1        Integer Execution Unit
The integer execution unit is used to process arithmetic and logical instructions. Adds, subtracts,
compares, count leading zeros, shifts and rotates execute in a single cycle.
Multiply instructions have a latency and throughput rate of 1 cycle.
Divide instructions have a variable latency (6–16 cycles) depending on the operand data. The worst case
integer divide requires 16 cycles. While the divide is running, the rest of the pipeline is unavailable for
additional instructions (blocking divide).

                           e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                         4-3
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


4.2.2         Load/Store Unit
The load/store unit executes instructions that move data between the GPRs and the memory subsystem. A
load followed by a dependent instruction does not incur any pipeline stall, except when the dependent
instruction is a load/store instruction, and the latter instruction is using the previous load data for its
effective address (EA) calculation, in which case a 1 cycle “register-busy” pipeline stall is incurred.
Loads, when free of the above effective address calculation dependency, execute with a maximum
throughput of one per cycle and one cycle latency. Store data can be fed-forward from an immediately
preceding load with no stall.


4.3         Instruction Pipeline
The four stage processor pipeline consists of stages for instruction fetch (IFETCH), instruction decode
(DECODE), execution (EXECUTE), and result writeback (WB). For memory operations, the effective
address generation occurs in the decode stage, while the memory access occurs in the execute stage.
The processor also contains an instruction prefetch buffer to allow buffering of instructions prior to the
decode stage. Instructions proceed from this buffer to the instruction decode stage by entering the
instruction decode register IR.
                                              Table 4-1. Pipeline Stages

                                Stage                              Description

                               IFETCH          Instruction Fetch From Memory

                            DECODE/EA          Instruction Decode / Register Read/ Operand
                                               Forwarding / EA Calculation

                           EXECUTE/MEM         Instruction Execution / Memory Access

                                 WB            Write Back to Registers




                                e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-4                                                                                          Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing



                                               Simple Instruction

                           IFetch                I1       I2

                           Decode                         I1        I2

                           Execute                                  I1     I2

                           Writeback                                       I1        I2




                                                Load / Store Instruction
                           IFetch                  L1        L2
                           Decode / EA Calc / Drive address L1       L2
                           Memory Access / Drive data back           L1     L2
                           Writeback                                        L1         L2


                                        Figure 4-2. Pipeline Diagram


4.3.1        Description of Pipeline Stages
The IFetch pipeline stage retrieve instructions from the memory system and determine where the next
instruction fetch is performed. Up to two 16-bit instructions are sent from memory to the instruction
buffers every cycle.
The Decode pipeline stage decodes instructions and performs dependency checking. Simple integer
instructions complete execution in the Execute stage of the pipeline.
Execution of load/store instructions is pipelined. The effective address calculations for load/store
instructions are performed in the decode stage. This effective address is driven out to the data memory in
the same stage. The actual memory access occurs in the execute stage.
Load-to-use dependencies do not incur pipeline bubbles except when the dependent instruction is a load
or store instruction, and the latter instruction is dependent on its previous load data for EA calculation. If
an ALU instruction is dependent on a load instruction, the data is fed directly into the ALU for execution.
No pipeline bubble is incurred in this case.
Multiply instructions require 1 clock to execute.
All condition-setting instructions complete in the Execute stage of the pipeline.
Result feed-forward hardware forwards the result of one instruction into the source operand(s) of a
following instruction so that the execution of data-dependent instructions do not wait until the completion
of the result writeback.




                            e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                              4-5
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


4.3.2         Instruction Buffers
e200 contains a set of instruction buffers which supply instructions into the Instruction Register (IR) for
decoding.
Instruction prefetches request a 64-bit doubleword and the buffer is filled with a pair of instructions at a
time, except for the case of a change of flow fetch where the target is to the second (odd) word. In that case
only a 32-bit prefetch is performed to load the instruction buffer. This 32-bit fetch may be immediately
followed by a 64-bit prefetch to fill Slots 0 and 1 in the event that the branch is resolved to be taken.
In normal sequential execution, instructions are loaded into the IR from Slot 0, and as a pair of slots are
emptied, they are refilled. Whenever a pair of slots is empty, a 64-bit prefetch is initiated which fills the
earliest empty slot pairs beginning with Slot 0.
If the instruction buffer empties, instruction issue stalls, and the buffer is refilled. The first returned
instruction is forwarded directly to the IR.
                                  SLOT3



                                            SLOT2



                                                    SLOT1



                                                            SLOT0




                                                                                          DECODE
                                                                       MUX                         .




                                                                                   IR
                                                                                                   .

                 DATA 0:31



                                            Figure 4-3. e200 Instruction Buffers

4.3.2.1         Branch Prediction in e200z1
In e200z1 the HID0[BPRED] field is used to control whether prediction will be made for forward or
backward branches (or both).
To resolve branch instructions and improve the accuracy of branch predictions, e200 implements a
dynamic branch prediction mechanism using a 4-entry branch target buffer (BTB), a fully associative
address cache of branch target addresses. The BTB on e200 is purposefully small to reduce cost and power.
It is expected to accelerate the execution of loops with some potential change of flow within the loop body.
An entry is allocated in the BTB whenever a branch resolves as taken and the BTB is enabled. Branches
that have not been allocated are always predicted as not taken. Entries in the BTB are allocated on taken
branches using a FIFO replacement algorithm.
Each BTB entry holds a 2-bit branch history counter, whose value is incremented or decremented on a
BTB hit, depending on whether the branch was taken. The counter can assume four different values:
strongly taken, weakly taken, weakly not taken, and strongly not taken.
A branch will be predicted as taken on a hit in the BTB with a counter value of strongly or weakly taken.
In this case the target address contained in the BTB is used to redirect the instruction fetch stream to the
target of the branch prior to the branch reaching the instruction decode stage. In the case of a mispredicted

                                e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-6                                                                                                Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


branch, the instruction fetch stream returns to the sequential instruction stream after the branch has been
resolved.
When a branch is predicted taken and the branch is later resolved (in the branch decode stage), the value
of the counter is updated. A branch whose counter indicates weakly taken is resolved as taken, the counter
increments so that the prediction becomes strongly taken. If the branch resolves as not taken, the prediction
changes to weakly not-taken. The counter saturates in the strongly taken states when the prediction is
correct.
e200 does not implement the static branch prediction that is defined by the PowerPC architecture. The BO
prediction bit in branch encodings is ignored.
Dynamic branch prediction is enabled by setting BUCSR[BPEN]. Clearing BUCSR[BPEN] disables
dynamic branch prediction, in which case e200 predicts every branch as not taken. Additional control is
available in the HID0[BPRED] field to control whether forward or backward branches (or both) are
candidates for entry into the BTB, and thus for branch prediction. Once a branch is in the BTB,
HID0[BPRED] has no further effect on that branch entry.
The BTB uses virtual addresses for performing tag comparisons. On allocation of a BTB entry, the
effective address of a taken branch, along with the current Instruction Space (as indicated by MSR[IS]) is
loaded into the entry and the counter value is set to weakly taken. The current PID value is not maintained
as part of the tag information.
e200 does support automatic flushing of the BTB when the current PID value is updated by a mtcr PID0
instruction. Software is otherwise responsible for maintaining coherency in the BTB when a change in
effective to real (virtual to physical) address mapping is changed. This is supported by the BUCSR[BBFI]
control bit.

                          TAG                                     DATA


                  branch addr[0:30]        IS          target address[0:30]   counter        entry 0




                                    IS = Instruction Space




                                e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                              4-7
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing




                                TAG                                           DATA


                          branch addr[0:30]        IS          target address[0:30]       counter    entry 0


                          branch addr[0:30]        IS          target address[0:30]       counter    entry 1


                                 ...               ...                  ...               ...        entry 2


                          branch addr[0:30]        IS          target address[0:30]       counter    entry 3




                                            IS = Instruction Space


                                            Figure 4-4. e200 Branch Target Buffer


4.3.3         Single-Cycle Instruction Pipeline Operation
Sequences of single-cycle execution instructions follow the flow in Figure 4-5. Instructions are issued and
completed in program order. Most arithmetic and logical instructions fall into this category.


                  Time Slot




              1st Inst.       IFETCH        DECODE       EXECUTE      FFwd/WB


              2nd Inst.                       IFETCH     DECODE       EXECUTE         FFwd/WB


              3rd Inst.                                    IFETCH     DECODE          EXECUTE   FFwd/WB



                               Figure 4-5. Basic Pipeline Flow, Single Cycle Instructions


4.3.4         Basic Load and Store Instruction Pipeline Operation
The effective address (EA) calculations for load and store instructions are performed in the decode stage.
The memory access occurs in the execution stage.
If a load instruction is followed by an dependent ALU instruction, the load data is driven from the memory
in the MEM stage and feed-forwarded into the dependent ALU instruction in the following cycle. As a
result, the is no load-to-use pipeline bubble. Figure 4-7 shows the instruction flow for a load instruction
followed by a dependent add instruction.

                                 e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-8                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing




                Time Slot




            1st LD inst.     IFETCH    DEC / EA         MEM         MEM
                                                    Feedforward

            2nd ADD inst.                IFETCH      DECODE       EXECUTE    MEM




                            Figure 4-6. A Load Followed By A Dependent Add Instruction

Back-to-back load/store instructions are executed in a pipelined fashion, provided that their effective
address calculations are not dependent on their previous load instructions. Figure 4-7 shows the basic pipe
line flow for two back-to-back load instructions. In this case, the 2nd load does not depend on its previous
load data for its EA calculation. Notice that the memory access of the first load instruction overlaps in time
with the EA calculation of the second load instruction.



                  Time Slot




             1st LD inst.     IFETCH     DEC / EA        MEM         WB


             2nd LD inst.                 IFETCH       DEC / EA     MEM        WB




                                      Figure 4-7. Back-to-back Load Instructions




                                e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                              4-9
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


When a load is followed by a load or a store instruction that depends on the first load data for EA
calculation, a pipeline stall is incurred. Figure 4-8 shows the instruction flow for a load instruction
followed by a dependent store instruction through EA calculation. The second store instruction, in this
case, is dependent on the first load instruction for its EA calculation.



                  Time Slot




              1st LD inst.    IFETCH        DECODE    EXECUTE          WB
                                                      Feedforward
              2nd STORE inst.                IFETCH    DECODE        EA Calc     MEM       WB




                             Figure 4-8. A Load Followed By A Dependent Store Instruction

A store instruction that depends on its previous load for its store data does not stall the pipeline.

4.3.5          Change-of-Flow Instruction Pipeline Operation
A branch instruction takes either one or two cycles to execute. Simple change of flow instructions require
2 cycles to refill the pipeline with the target instruction for taken branches and branch and link instructions
with no prediction.



         Time Slot




   BR Inst.          IFETCH         Slot0        DECODE   EXEC



                                                                                                       ...
                                  Target Inst.              IFETCH      DECODE   EXEC      WB




                                  Figure 4-9. Basic Pipeline Flow, Branch Instructions

For branch type instructions in e200z1, in some situations this 2 cycle timing may be reduced by
performing the target fetch speculatively while the branch instruction is still being fetched into the


                                 e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-10                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                  Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


instruction buffer. The branch target address is obtained from the BTB. The resulting branch timing
reduces to a single clock when the target fetch is initiated early enough and the branch is taken.



        Time Slot




                                                                            ...
   BR Inst.          IFETCH        Slot0     DECODE      EXEC



                                                                                        ...
                 BTB hit          TFETCH        Slot0     DECODE     EXEC


      Target Inst.
     (speculative fetch)


                                 Figure 4-10. Basic Pipeline Flow, Branch Speculation

4.3.6         Basic Multi-Cycle Instruction Pipeline Operation
The divide and load and store multiple instructions require multiple cycles in the execute stage.



                    Time Slot




        LMW/STMW/DIV Inst.                 IFETCH       DECODE      EXEC0                     EXECn       WB
                                                                                  ...




                                Figure 4-11. Basic Pipeline Flow, Multi-cycle Instructions

Instructions must complete and write back results in order. A single cycle instruction which follows a
multi-cycle instruction must wait for completion of the multi-cycle instruction prior to its writeback in
order to meet the in-order requirement. Result feed-forward paths are provided so that execution may
continue prior to result writeback.




                                  e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                               4-11
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


4.3.7          Additional Examples of Instruction Pipeline Operation for Load and
               Store
Figure 4-12 shows an example of pipelining two non-data dependent load or store instructions with a
following data dependent single cycle instruction. While the first load or store begins accessing memory
in the MEM stage, the next load or store can be calculating a new effective address in the DEC/EA stage.
The add in this example does not stall even though there is a data dependency on its preceding load
instruction.


                         Time Slot




            1st LD/ST (no wait)             IFETCH    DEC / EA        MEM           WB


              2nd LD/ST (no wait)                      IFETCH    DEC / EA           MEM         WB


              ADD                                                 IFETCH            DEC     EXECUTE       WB


                                     Figure 4-12. Pipelined Load/Store Instructions

For memory access instructions, wait-states may occur. This causes a following memory access instruction
to stall because the following memory access may not be initiated as shown in Figure 4-13. Here, the first
ld/st instruction incurs a wait-state on the bus interface, causing succeeding instructions to stall.


                    Time Slot




       1st LD/ST (with wait)           IFETCH    DEC / EA       MEM     Stall (wait)      WB


       2nd LD/ST (no wait)                        IFETCH    DEC / EA        Stall         MEM        WB


        ADD                                                  IFETCH         Stall         DEC    EXECUTE         WB


                           Figure 4-13. Pipelined Load/Store Instructions with Wait-state


4.3.8          Move to/from SPR Instruction Pipeline Operation
Most mtspr and mfspr instructions are treated like single cycle instructions in the pipeline, and do not
cause stalls. Exceptions are for the MSR, the Debug SPRs, the Embedded Floating Point Unit, and MMU
SPRs that do cause stalls. The following figures show examples of mtspr and mfspr instruction timing.

                                  e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-12                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                         Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


Figure 4-14 applies to the Debug SPRs. These instructions do not begin execution until all previous
instructions have finished their execute stage. If the previous instruction of mfspr or mtspr is a multicycle
instruction, the mfspr and mtspr instructions do not begin execution until its previous instruction moves
into the WB stage as shown in Figure 4-14. In addition, execution of subsequent instructions is stalled until
the mfspr and mtspr instructions complete.



           Time Slot




        Prev Instr. (multicycle)     IFETCH    DEC      EXE1       ...    EXEn    WB



                                              IFETCH    DEC       Stall   ...    EXE          WB
           mtspr, mfspr

              Next Instruction                                             ...
                                                       IFETCH     Stall          DEC          Stall    EXE       WB


                                   Figure 4-14. mtspr, mfspr Instruction Execution—(1)

Figure 4-15 applies to the mtmsr instruction and the wrtee and wrteei instructions. Execution of
subsequent instructions is stalled until these instructions writeback.



                    Time Slot




                 Prev Instr.                  IFETCH    DEC      EXE      WB



                    mtmsr, wrtee, wrteei               IFETCH    DEC      EXE    WB


                       Next Instruction
                                                                IFETCH    DEC    Stall       EXE      WB



                                Figure 4-15. mtmsr, wrtee, wrteei Instruction Execution

Access to MMU SPRs are stalled until all outstanding bus accesses have completed and the MMU is idle
(p_[i,d]_cmbusy negated) to allow an access window where no translations or cache cycles are required.
Figure 4-16 shows an example where an outstanding bus access causes mtspr/mfspr execution to be
delayed until the bus becomes idle. Processor access requests will be held off during execution of a MMU
SPR instruction. A subsequent access request may be generated in the WB cycle. This same protocol

                                   e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                      4-13
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


applies to MMU management instructions (for example, tlbre, tlbwe, etc.) as well as to the DCRs. See
Section 7.2, “Internal Interface Signals,” for a definition of internal signals used in Figure 4-16.


           Time Slot




        Single cycle                IFETCH    DEC      EXE      ...     ...    WB
        Instruction

        mtspr, mfspr                         IFETCH    DEC     Stall   Stall   EXE     WB



        Next Instruction                              IFETCH   DEC     Stall   Stall   EXE   WB

                       p_rd_spr,
                       p_wr_spr


                  p_[i,d]_treq_b


               p_[i,d]_tbusy[0]_b


                    p_[i,d]_ta_b



                 p_[i,d]_cmbusy


              Figure 4-16. DCR, MMU mtspr, mfspr and MMU Management Instruction Execution


4.4         Control Hazards
Several internal control hazards exist in e200 which can cause certain instruction sequences to incur one
or more stall cycles. These include the following:
    • mfspr instruction preceded by a mtspr instruction—issue stalls until the mtspr completes

4.5         Instruction Serialization
The types of serialization required by the core are as follows:
   • Completion serialization
   • Dispatch (Decode/Issue) serialization
   • Refetch serialization




                                   e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-14                                                                                          Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                           Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


4.5.1        Completion Serialization
A completion serialized instruction is held for execution until all prior instructions have completed. The
instruction then executes after it is next to complete in program order. Results from these instructions are
not available for or forwarded to subsequent instructions until the instruction completes. Instructions
which are completion serialized are:
    • Instructions that access or modify system control or status registers. for example, mcrxr, mtmsr,
        wrtee, wrteei, mtspr, mfspr (except to CTR/LR),
    • Instructions that manage TLBs
    • Instructions defined by the architecture as context or execution synchronizing: isync, se_isync,
        msync, rfi, rfci, rfdi, se_rfi, se_rfci, se_rfdi, sc, se_sc.

4.5.2        Dispatch Serialization
Some instructions are dispatch-serialized by the core. An instruction that is dispatch-serialized prevents
the next instruction from decoding until all instructions up to and including the dispatch-serialized
instruction completes. Instructions which are dispatch serialized are isync, se_isync, mbar, msync, rfi,
rfci, rfdi, se_rfi, se_rfci, se_rfdi, sc, se_sc.

4.5.3        Refetch Serialization
Refetch serialized instructions inhibit dispatching of subsequent instructions and force a pipeline refill to
refetch subsequent instructions after completion. These include:
    • The context synchronizing instruction isync.
    • The rfi, rfci, rfdi, se_rfi, se_rfci, se_rfdi, sc, and se_sc instructions.




                           e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        4-15
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


4.6         Interrupt Recognition and Exception Processing
Figure 4-17 shows timing for interrupt recognition and exception processing overhead. This example
shows best-case response timing when an interrupt is received and processed during execution of a
sequence of single-cycle instructions.


             Time Slot

                               1         2       3       4        5         6     7      8    9      10


                            IFETCH      DEC    EXE     WB
           Single cycle
           Instructions
                                              DEC/
                                     IFETCH   Abort     --       --




                                                      final sample point
          p_extint_b



          p_iack




           1st Instruction of handler                         IFETCH       DEC   EXE   WB



          ec_excp_detected*


         update_esr*

          update_msr*


          oldpc_->srr0*

          oldmsr_->srr1*




              * - internal operations

                         Figure 4-17. Interrupt Recognition and Handler Instruction Execution




                                   e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-16                                                                                         Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                      Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


Figure 4-18 shows timing for interrupt recognition and exception processing overhead. This example
shows best-case response timing when an interrupt is received and processed during execution of a load
or store instruction. The fetch for the handler is delayed until completion of the load or store, regardless of
the number of wait-states.


        Time Slot

                          1          2       3       4        5        6         7      8         9      10         11



     Load/Store       DEC/EA       Mem     wait    wait     WB
     Instructions

                      IFETCH       DEC     Abort     --      --


                                           DEC/
                               IFETCH              Stall   Stall     Stall
                                           Abort

                                                           final sample point

     p_extint_b



     p_iack




      1st Instruction of handler                                   IFETCH       DEC   EXE       WB



     ec_excp_detected*


     update_esr*

     update_msr*


     oldpc_->srr0*

     oldmsr_->srr1*




         * - internal operations
      Figure 4-18. Interrupt Recognition and Handler Instruction Execution—Load/Store in Progress




                                   e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                   4-17
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


Figure 4-19 shows timing for interrupt recognition and exception processing overhead. This example
shows best-case response timing when an interrupt is received and processed during execution of a
multicycle interruptible instruction.


            Time Slot

                              1           2    3       4       5        6          7    8    9     10



         Multi-cycle        IFETCH    DEC     EXE    Abort     --      --
         Interruptible
         Instruction
         Next Instruction            IFETCH   DEC   Abort     --       --


                                                              final sample point

           p_extint_b



           p_iack



                                                                    IFETCH     DEC     EXE   WB
             1st Instruction of handler



           ec_excp_detected*


           update_esr*

           update_msr*


           oldpc_->srr0*

           oldmsr_->srr1*




                * - internal operations

   Figure 4-19. Interrupt Recognition and Handler Instruction Execution—Multi-Cycle Instruction Abort




                                  e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-18                                                                                         Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                     Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


4.7          Instruction Timings
Instruction timing in number of processor clock cycles for various instruction classes is shown in
Table 4-2. Pipelined instructions are shown with cycles of total latency and throughput cycles. Divide
instructions are not pipelined and block other instructions from executing during execution.
Load/store multiple instruction cycles are represented as a fixed number of cycles plus a variable number
of cycles where ‘n’ is the number of words accessed by the instruction. In addition, cycle times marked
with an ‘&’ require variable number of additional cycles due to serialization.
                                            Table 4-2. Instruction Class Cycle Counts

             Class of Instructions                Latency    Throughput                       Special Notes

integer: add, sub, shift, rotate, logical,            1           1                                —
cntlzw class instructions

integer: compare                                      1           1                                —

Branch                                               2/1         2/1      Branches take either 2 or 1 cycles to execute.

 multiply                                             1           1                                —

 divide                                             6-16         6-16     data dependent timing

CR logical                                            1           1                                —

loads (non-multiple)                                  1           1                                —

load multiple                                       1+n         1+n       Actual timing depends on n and address alignment.
                                                                          (n = number of registers transferred)

stores (non-multiple)                                 1           1                                —

store multiple                                      1+n         1+n       Actual timing depends on n and address alignment.
                                                                          (n = number of registers transferred)

mtmsr, wrtee, wrteei                                 2&           2                                —

mcrf                                                  1           1                                —

mfspr, mtspr                                         2&          2&       applies to Debug SPRs, optional unit SPRS

mfspr, mfmsr                                          1           1       applies to internal, non Debug SPRs

mfcr, mtcr                                            1           1                                —

rfi, rfci, rfdi, se_rfi, se_rfci, se_rfdi             3           —                                —

sc, se_sc                                             3           —                                —

tw, twi                                               3           —       Trap taken timing


4.8          Operand Placement on Performance
The placement (location and alignment) of operands in memory affects relative performance of memory
accesses, and in some cases, affects it significantly. Table 4-3 indicates the effects for the e200 core.




                                   e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                    4-19
Instruction Pipeline and Execution Timing


In Table 4-3, optimal means that one effective address (EA) calculation occurs during the memory
operation. Good means that multiple EA calculations occur during the memory operation which may cause
additional bus activities with multiple bus transfers. Poor means that an alignment interrupt is generated
by the storage operation.
                           Table 4-3. Performance Effects of Storage Operand Placement

                                                     Operand

                                                Size      Byte Align    Performance

                                            4 Byte        4            optimal
                                                          <4           good

                                            2 Byte        2            optimal
                                                          <2           good

                                            1 Byte        1            optimal

                                            lmw, stmw     4            good
                                                          <4           poor

                                            string        N/A                 —

                                            Notes:
                                              Optimal: One EA calculation occurs.
                                              Good: Multiple EA calculations occur
                                              which may cause additional bus activities
                                              with multiple bus transfers.
                                              Poor: Alignment Interrupt occurs.




                                e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
4-20                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor