Chapter 1
e200z1 Overview
1.1       Overview of the e200z1 Cores
The e200 processor family is a set of CPU cores that implement low-cost versions of the Power
Architecture™ Book E architecture. e200 processors are designed for deeply embedded control
applications, which require low cost solutions rather than maximum performance.
The processors integrate an integer execution unit, branch control unit, instruction fetch and load/store
units, and a multi-ported register file capable of sustaining three read and two write operations per clock.
Most integer instructions execute in a single clock cycle. Branch target prefetching is performed by the
branch unit to allow single-cycle branches in some cases.
The e200z1 core is a single-issue, 32-bit Power Architecture Book E compliant design with 32-bit general
purpose registers (GPRs). Power Architecture Book E floating-point instructions are not supported by
e200 in hardware, but are trapped and may be emulated by software.All arithmetic instructions that
execute in the core operate on data in the general purpose registers (GPRs).
In addition to the base Power Architecture Book E instruction set support, the core also implements the
VLE (variable-length encoding) APU, providing improved code density. The VLE APU is further
documented in the PowerPC™ VLE APU Definition, Version 1.01, a separate document.
In the remainder of this document, the e200z1 core is also referred to as the “e200z1 core” or “e200 core”
when referring to the whole e200 family.

1.1.1        Features
The following is a list of some of the key features of the e200z1 core:
   • 32-bit Power Architecture Book E programmer’s model
   • Single issue, 32-bit CPU
   • Implements the VLE APU for reduced code footprint
   • In-order execution and retirement
   • Precise exception handling
   • Branch processing unit
       — Dedicated branch address calculation adder
       — Branch acceleration using Branch Target Buffer
   • Supports independent instruction and data accesses to different memory subsystems, such as
       SRAM and Flash memory via independent Instruction and Data bus interface units (BIUs).
   • Load/store unit

                           e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                  1-1
e200z1 Overview


          — 1 cycle load latency
          — Fully pipelined
          — Big- and Little-endian support
          — Misaligned access support
          — Zero load-to-use pipeline bubbles for aligned transfers
      •   Power management
          — Low power design
          — Power saving modes: doze, nap, sleep, and wait
          — Dynamic power management of execution units
      •   Testability
          — Synthesizeable, full MuxD scan design
          — ABIST/MBIST for optional memory arrays

1.1.2         Microarchitecture Summary
The e200 processor utilizes a four stage pipeline for instruction execution. The Instruction Fetch (stage 1),
Instruction Decode/Register file Read/Effective Address Calculation (stage 2), Execute/Memory Access
(stage 3), and Register Writeback (stage 4) stages operate in an overlapped fashion, allowing single clock
instruction execution for most instructions.
The integer execution unit consists of a 32-bit Arithmetic Unit (AU), a Logic Unit (LU), a 32-bit Barrel
shifter (Shifter), a Mask-Insertion Unit (MIU), a Condition Register manipulation Unit (CRU), a
Count-Leading-Zeros unit (CLZ), a 32x32 Hardware Multiplier array, result feed-forward hardware, and
a hardware divider.
Arithmetic and logical operations are executed in a single cycle with the exception of the divide
instructions. A Count-Leading-Zeros unit operates in a single clock cycle.
The Instruction Unit contains a PC incrementer and a dedicated Branch Address adder to minimize delays
during change of flow operations. Sequential prefetching is performed to ensure a supply of instructions
into the execution pipeline. Branch target prefetching from the BTB is performed to accelerate certain
taken branches in the e200z31. Prefetched instructions are placed into an instruction buffer with 6 entries
in e200z1, each capable of holding a single 32-bit instruction or a pair of 16-bit instructions.
Conditional branches which are not taken execute in a single clock. Branches with successful target
prefetching have an effective execution time of 1 clock. All other taken branches have an execution time
of two clocks.
Memory load and store operations are provided for byte, halfword, and word (32-bit) data with automatic
zero or sign extension of byte and halfword load data as well as optional byte reversal of data. These
instructions can be pipelined to allow effective single cycle throughput. Load and store multiple word
instructions allow low overhead context save and restore operations. The load/store unit contains a
dedicated effective address adder to allow effective address generation to be optimized. Also, a load-to-use
dependency does not incur any pipeline bubbles for most cases.



                            e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
1-2                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                              e200z1 Overview


The Condition Register unit supports the condition register (CR) and condition register operations defined
by the PowerPC™ architecture. The condition register consists of eight 4-bit fields that reflect the results
of certain operations, such as move, integer and floating-point compare, arithmetic, and logical
instructions, and provide a mechanism for testing and branching.
Vectored and autovectored interrupts are supported by the CPU. Vectored interrupt support is provided to
allow multiple interrupt sources to have unique interrupt handlers invoked with no software overhead.




                           e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                  1-3
e200z1 Overview


  .




                             OnCE/NEXUS
                                                                                      CPU
                        CONTROL LOGIC
                                                                                CONTROL LOGIC




                               MEMORY
                             MANAGEMENT                                               LR                        INTEGER
                                UNIT                                           SPR    CR         GPR           EXECUTION
                                                                                      CTR                         UNIT
                                                                                      XER
                   ADDRESS




                                                                                                                MULTIPLY
                                    INSTRUCTION BUS INTERFACE UNIT




                                                                               INSTRUCTION UNIT                   UNIT
                                                                           INSTRUCTION BUFFER
                                                                                                                            CONTROL
                             32
                   DATA




                                                                                                              EXTERNAL
                                                                                                                SPR
                                                                                                             INTERFACE       DATA
                             32




                                                                                                            (MTSPR/MFSPR)
                   CONTROL




                                                                                     PC     BRANCH
                                                                                    UNIT     UNIT

                                                                                     LOAD/
                             N




                                                                                     STORE
                                                                                      UNIT




                                                                         DATA BUS INTERFACE UNIT



                                                                               32           32         N
                                                                     ADDRESS        DATA         CONTROL



                                                                         Figure 1-1. e200z1 Block Diagram

1.1.2.1           Instruction Unit Features
The features of the e200 Instruction unit are:
   • 32-bit instruction fetch path supports fetching of one 32-bit instruction per clock, or up to two
       16-bit VLE instructions per clock.

                                   e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
1-4                                                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                              e200z1 Overview


    •   Instruction buffer with 4 entries in e200z1, each holding a single 32-bit instruction, or a pair of
        16-bit instructions
    •   Dedicated PC incrementer supporting instruction prefetches
    •   Branch unit with dedicated branch address adder and small branch target buffer logic supporting
        single cycle of execution of certain branches, two cycles for all others

1.1.2.2       Integer Unit Features
The e200 integer unit supports single cycle execution of most integer instructions:
   • 32-bit AU for arithmetic and comparison operations
   • 32-bit LU for logical operations
   • 32-bit priority encoder for count leading zero’s function
   • 32-bit single cycle barrel shifter for shifts and rotates
   • 32-bit mask unit for data masking and insertion
   • Divider logic for signed and unsigned divide in 6-16 clocks with minimized execution timing
   • 32x32 hardware multiplier array supports single-cycle 32x32->32 multiply

1.1.2.3       Load/Store Unit Features
The e200 load/store unit supports load, store, and the load multiple / store multiple instructions:
   • 32-bit effective address adder for data memory address calculations
   • Pipelined operation supports throughput of one load or store operation per cycle
   • 32-bit interface to memory dedicated memory interface on e200z1)

1.1.2.4       e200z1 System Bus Features
The features of the e200z1 System Bus interface are as follows:
   • Independent Instruction and Data Buses
   • AMBA AHB Lite Rev 2.0 Specification with support for ARM v6 AMBA Extensions
       — Exclusive Access Monitor
       — Byte Lane Strobes
       — Cache Allocate Support
   • 32-bit address bus plus attributes and control on each bus
   • 32-bit read data bus for Instruction Interface
   • Separate uni-directional 32-bit read data bus and 32-bit write data bus for Data Interface
   • Overlapped, in-order accesses

1.1.2.5       MMU Features
The features of the MMU are as follows:
   • Virtual Memory support


                           e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                  1-5
e200z1 Overview


      •   32-bit Virtual and Physical Addresses
      •   8-bit Process Identifier
      •   8-entry Fully-associative TLB
      •   Support for multiple page sizes from 4-Kbyte to 4-Gbyte
      •   Entry Flush Protection




                            e200z1 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
1-6                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor