Chapter 1
Overview
This document defines a programming model for use with the variable-length encoding (VLE) instruction
set extension. Three types of programming interfaces are described herein:
    • An application binary interface (ABI) defining low-level coding conventions
    • An assembly language interface
    • A simplified mnemonic assembly language interface

1.1       Application Binary Interface (ABI)
The VLE programming model extends the existing PowerPC™ ABIs. This extension is independent of the
endian mode with regard to data; however, VLE instructions are supported only in big-endian mode. The
ABI reviews instruction and data representations for memory management and distinguishes between
PowerPC Book E and VLE instructions. The ABI also discusses VLE section identification and relocation
types used by the executable and linking format (ELF).
                                                     NOTE
                Use this chapter in conjunction with the PowerPC e500 Application Binary
                Interface (e500 ABI). Except for the sections discussed in this chapter, the
                VLE ABI follows the e500 ABI standard. For information on register usage
                and availability, function calling sequence, parameter passing, stack frames,
                and other topics, refer to the e500 ABI.

1.2       Assembly Language Interface
The assembly language interface provides an overview of the VLE instructions. The description of each
instruction along with the instruction mnemonic and operands can be found in the VLE section of the
EREF.

1.3       Simplified Mnemonics Assembly Language Interface
Simplified mnemonics are provided for easier coding of assembly language programs. They are defined
for the most frequently used forms of branch conditional, compare, trap, rotate and shift, and certain other
instructions defined by the VLE extension. Some assemblers may define additional simplified mnemonics
not listed in this document; however, all assemblers should support the VLE simplified mnemonics listed
in Appendix A.




                 Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Extension Programming Interface Manual, Rev. 1
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                  1-1
Overview




           Variable-Length Encoding (VLE) Extension Programming Interface Manual, Rev. 1
1-2                                                                               Freescale Semiconductor