Chapter 9
Power Management
9.1       Power management
Power management is supported by e200z759n3 cores to minimize overall system power consumption.
The e200z759n3 core provides the ability to initiate power management from external sources as well as
through software techniques. The power states on the e200z759n3 core are described below.

9.1.1        Active state
The Active state is the default state for the e200z759n3 core in which all of its internal units are operating
at full processor clock speed. In this state, the e200z759n3 core still provides dynamic power management
in which individual internal functional units may stop clocking automatically whenever they are idle.

9.1.2        Waiting state
The e200z759n3 core enters the Waiting state as a result of executing a wait instruction. Following entry
into the waiting state, instruction execution and bus activity is suspended. Most internal clocks are gated
off in this state. The e200z759n3 core asserts p_waiting to indicate it is in the waiting state. Prior to
entering the waiting state, all outstanding instructions and bus transactions will be completed, and the
cache’s store and push buffers will be flushed. The m_clk input should remain running while in the waiting
state to allow for interrupt sampling, and to allow further transitions into the Halted or Stopped state if
requested and to keep the Time Base operational if it is using m_clk as the clock source.
In the waiting state, the core is waiting for a valid unmasked pending interrupt request. Once a pending
interrupt request is received, the core will exit the waiting state and begin interrupt processing. The return
program counter value will point to the next instruction after the wait instruction. The interrupt can be an
external input interrupt, various critical interrupts, a debug interrupt (based on ICMP), a non-maskable
interrupt, or a machine check interrupt (p_mcp_b assertion, etc.). Once the interrupt processing begins,
the core will not return to the waiting state until another wait instruction is executed.
The waiting state can be temporarily exited and returned to if a request is made to enter hardware debug
mode (various mechanisms), the Halted state, or the Stopped state. After exiting one of these states, the
processor will return to the waiting state. While temporarily exited, the p_waiting output will negate, and
will be re-asserted once the CPU returns to the waiting state.

9.1.3        Halted state
Instruction execution and bus activity is suspended in the Halted state. Most internal clocks are gated off
in this state. The e200z759n3 core asserts p_halted to indicate it is in the halted state. Prior to entering the
halted state, all outstanding bus transactions will be completed, and the cache’s store and push buffers will
be flushed. The m_clk input should remain running while in the Halted state to ensure that snoop requests
continue to be processed, to allow further transitions into the Stopped state if requested, and to keep the
Time Base operational if it is using m_clk as the clock source.


                                   e200z759n3 Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      555
9.1.4        Stopped state
The Stopped state is characterized as having all internal functional units of the e200z759n3 core stopped
except the Time Base unit and the clock control state machine logic. The internal m_clk may be kept
running to keep the Time Base active and to allow quick recovery to the full on state. Clocks are not
running to functional units in this state except for the Time Base. The Stopped state is reached after
transitioning through the Halted state with the p_stop input asserted. The p_stopped output signal will be
asserted once the Stopped state is reached. The CPU will not enter the Stopped state until all snoops have
been processed and the snoop queue is empty. System logic is responsible for ensuring that snoop requests
are no longer generated once the p_stop input is asserted, in order to allow a transition from the Halted to
the Stopped state.
While in the Stopped state, further power savings may be achieved by disabling the Time Base by asserting
p_tbdisable, or by stopping the m_clk input. This is done externally by the system after the e200z759n3
core is safely in the Stopped state and has asserted the p_stopped output signal. To exit from the Stopped
state, the system must first restart the m_clk input.
Since the Time Base unit is off during the Stopped state if it is using m_clk as the clock source and m_clk
is stopped, or if the Time Base clocking is disabled by the assertion of p_tbdisable, system software must
usually have to access an external time base source after returning to the full on state in order to re-initialize
the Time Base unit. In addition, it will not be possible to use a Time Base related interrupt source to exit
low power states.
e200z759n3 also provides the capability of clocking the Time Base from an independent (but externally
synchronized) clock source, which would allow the Time Base to be maintained during the Stopped state,
and would allow a Time Base related interrupt to be generated to indicate an exit condition from the
Stopped state.
                                                          ipend

        ~p_halt & ~ p_stop           Waiting                                  Active              ~p_halt & ~ p_stop
                  & ~ipend                             exec wait

                                                            p_halt | p_stop            ~p_halt & ~ p_stop &
                                                                                       ~prev_waited

                                ~p_halt & ~ p_stop &                      Halted                  ~p_stop & p_halt
                                prev_waited                         (p_halted asserted)

                                                                   p_stop              ~p_stop



                                                                         Stopped                 p_stop
                                                                   (p_stopped asserted)

                                Figure 9-1. Power management state diagram


9.1.5        Power management pins
p_waiting - output pin asserted when the e200z759n3 core is in the Waiting state.


                                    e200z759n3 Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
556                                                                                                Freescale Semiconductor
p_halt - input pin is asserted by system logic to request the core to go into the Halted state. Negating this
pin causes the e200z759n3 core to transition back into the Active or Waiting state if p_stop is also negated.
p_halted - output pin asserted when the e200z759n3 core is in the Halted state.
p_stop - input pin is asserted by system logic to request that the e200z759n3 core go into the Stopped state.
Negating this pin causes the e200z759n3 core to transition back into the Halted state from the Stopped
state.
p_stopped - output pin asserted when the e200z759n3 core is in the Stopped state.
p_tbdisable - input pin is asserted by system logic when clocking of the Time Base should be disabled.
p_tbint - output pin is asserted when an internal Time Base interrupt request is signaled.
p_doze, p_nap, and p_sleep output pins that reflects the state of HID0DOZE, HID0NAP, and HID0SLEEP
respectively. These pins are qualified with MSRWE = 1. Interpretation of these signals is done by the
system logic.
p_wakeup - output pin asserted when an interrupt is pending or other condition that requires the clock to
be running.

9.1.6        Power management control bits
The following bits are used by software to generate a request to enter a power-saving state and to choose
the state to be entered:
    • MSRWE—The WE bit is used to qualify assertion of the p_doze, p_nap, and p_sleep output pins
        to the system logic. When MSRWE is negated, these pins are negated. When MSRWE is set, these
        pins reflect the state of their respective control bits in the HID0 register.
    • HID0DOZE —The interpretation of the doze mode bit is done by the external system logic. Doze
        mode on the e200z759n3 core is intended to be the halted state with the clocks running.
    • HID0NAP —The interpretation of the nap mode bit is done by the external system logic. Nap mode
        on the e200z759n3 core may be used for a powerdown state with the Time Base enabled.
    • HID0SLEEP —The interpretation of the sleep mode bit is done by the external system logic. Sleep
        mode on the e200z759n3 core may be used for a powerdown state with the Time Base disabled.

9.1.7        Software considerations for power management using wait
             instructions
Executing a wait instruction causes the e200z759n3 core to complete instruction fetch and execution
activity and await an interrupt. The p_waiting output is asserted once the Waiting state is entered. External
system hardware may interpret the state of this signal and activate the p_halt and/or p_stop inputs to cause
the e200z759n3 core to enter a quiescent state in which clocks may be disabled for low power operation.
Alternatively, system hardware may utilize some other clock control mechanism while the processor is in
the Waiting state, and p_wakeup remains negated.




                                  e200z759n3 Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                   557
9.1.8       Software considerations for power management using Doze, Nap or
            Sleep
Setting MSR[WE] generates a request to enter a power saving state. The power saving state (doze, nap, or
sleep) must be previously determined by setting the appropriate HID0 bit. Setting MSR[WE] has no direct
effect on instruction execution, but it simply reflected on p_doze, p_nap, and p_sleep depending on the
setting of HID0DOZE, HID0NAP, and HID0SLEEP respectively. Note that the e200z759n3 core is not
affected by assertion of these pins directly. External system hardware may interpret the state of these
signals and activate the p_halt and/or p_stop inputs to cause the e200z759n3 core to enter a quiescent state
in which clocks may be disabled for low power operation.
To ensure a clean transition into and out of a power saving mode, the following program sequence is
recommended:
                              sync
                              mtmsr (WE)
                              isync
                    loop:     br loop    (optionally use a wait instruction)

An interrupt is typically used to exit a power saving state. The p_wakeup output is used to indicate to the
system logic that an interrupt (or a debug request) has become pending. System logic uses this output to
re-enable the clocks and exit a low power state. The interrupt handler is responsible for determining how
to exit the low power loop if one is used. Wait instructions will be exited automatically. The vectored
interrupt capability provided by the core may be useful in assisting the determination if an external
hardware interrupt is used to perform the wake-up.

9.1.9       Debug considerations for power management
When a debug request is presented to the e200z759n3 core while in either the Waiting, Halted or Stopped
state, the p_wakeup signal will be asserted, and when m_clk is provided to the CPU, it will temporarily
exit the Waiting, Halted or Stopped state and will enter Debug mode regardless of the assertion of p_halt
or p_stop. The p_waiting, p_halted, and p_stopped outputs will be negated for the duration of the time the
CPU remains in a debug session (jd_debug_b asserted). When the debug session is exited, the CPU will
re-sample the p_halt and p_stop inputs and will re-enter the Halted or Stopped state as appropriate. If the
CPU was previously waiting, and no interrupt was received while in the debug session, it will re-enter the
Waiting state and re-assert p_waiting.




                                  e200z759n3 Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
558                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor