                Power ISA™
                Version 2.07




May 3, 2013




Softcopy Distribution: www.power.org.documentation
Version 2.07


The following paragraph does not apply to the United        © Copyright International Business Machines Corpora-
Kingdom or any country or state where such provisions       tion, 1994, 2013. All rights reserved.
are inconsistent with local law.
The specifications in this manual are subject to change
without notice. This manual is provided “AS IS”. Inter-
national Business Machines Corp. makes no warranty
of any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but
not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness for a particular purpose.
International Business Machines Corp. does not war-
rant that the contents of this publication or the accom-
panying source code examples, whether individually or
as one or more groups, will meet your requirements or
that the publication or the accompanying source code
examples are error-free.
This publication could include technical inaccuracies or
typographical errors. Changes are periodically made to
the information herein; these changes will be incorpo-
rated in new editions of the publication.
Address comments to IBM Corporation, 11400 Burnett
Road, Austin, Texas 78758-3493. IBM may use or dis-
tribute whatever information you supply in any way it
believes appropriate without incurring any obligation to
you.
The following terms are trademarks of the International
Business Machines Corporation in the United States
and/or other countries:

     IBM®
     Power ISA
     PowerPC®
     Power Architecture
     PowerPC Architecture
     Power Family
     RISC/System 6000®
     POWER®
     POWER2
     POWER4
     POWER4+
     POWER5
     POWER5+
     POWER6®
     POWER7®
     System/370
     System z
The POWER ARCHITECTURE and POWER.ORG.
word marks and the Power and Power.org logos and
related marks are trademarks and service marks
licensed by Power.org.
AltiVec is a trademark of Freescale Semiconductor, Inc.
used under license.
Notice to U.S. Government Users—Documentation
Related to Restricted Rights—Use, duplication or dis-
closure is subject to restrictions set fourth in GSA ADP
Schedule Contract with IBM Corporation.



ii         Power ISA™
                                                                                                     Version 2.07




Preface

The roots of the Power ISA (Instruction Set Architec-        Book II, Power ISA Virtual Environment Architecture,
ture) extend back over a quarter of a century, to IBM        defines the storage model and related instructions and
Research. The POWER (Performance Optimization                facilities available to the application programmer.
With Enhanced RISC) Architecture was introduced with
                                                             Book III-S, Power ISA Operating Environment Architec-
the RISC System/6000 product family in early 1990. In
                                                             ture, defines the supervisor instructions and related
1991, Apple, IBM, and Motorola began the collabora-
                                                             facilities used for general purpose implementations.
tion to evolve to the PowerPC Architecture, expanding
the architecture’s applicability. In 1997, Motorola and      Book III-E, Power ISA Operating Environment Architec-
IBM began another collaboration, focused on optimiz-         ture, defines the supervisor instructions and related
ing PowerPC for embedded systems, which produced             facilities used for embedded implementations. It was
Book E.                                                      derived from Book E and extended to include APU
                                                             function.
In 2006, Freescale and IBM collaborated on the cre-
ation of the Power ISA Version 2.03, which represented       Book VLE, Power ISAVariable Length Encoded Instruc-
the reunification of the architecture by combining           tions Architecture, defines alternative instruction
Book E content with the more general purpose Pow-            encodings and definitions intended to increase instruc-