                                                                        Chapter 9. Timer Facilities                 1211
Version 2.07


 1. Always take the Guest Watchdog Timer interrupt
    when pending, and never attempt to prevent its
    occurrence. In this mode, the Guest Watchdog
    Timer interrupt caused by a first time-out is used to
    clear GTSRWIS so a second time-out never occurs.
    GTSRENW is not cleared, thereby allowing the next
    time-out to cause another interrupt.
 2. Always take the Guest Watchdog Timer interrupt
    when pending, but avoid when possible. In this
    mode a recurring code loop of reliable duration (or
    perhaps a periodic interrupt handler such as the
    Guest Fixed-Interval Timer interrupt handler) is
    used to repeatedly clear GTSRENW such that a
    first time-out exception is avoided, and thus no
    Guest Watchdog Timer interrupt occurs. Once
    GTSRENW has been cleared, software has
    between one and two full Guest Watchdog periods
    before a Guest Watchdog exception will be posted
    in GTSRWIS. If this occurs before the software is
    able to clear GTSRENW again, a Guest Watchdog
    Timer interrupt will occur. In this case, the Guest
    Watchdog Timer interrupt handler will then clear
    both GTSRENW and GTSRWIS, in order to (hope-
    fully) avoid the next Guest Watchdog Timer inter-
    rupt.
 3. Never take the Guest Watchdog Timer interrupt. In
    this mode, Guest Watchdog Timer interrupts are
    disabled (via GTCRWIE=0), and the system
    depends upon a recurring code loop of reliable
    duration (or perhaps a periodic interrupt handler
    such as the Guest Fixed-Interval Timer interrupt
    handler) to repeatedly clear GTSRWIS such that a
    second time-out is avoided, and thus no virtualized
    reset occurs. GTSRENW is not cleared, thereby
    allowing the next time-out to set GTSRWIS again.
    The recurring code loop must have a period which
    is less than one Guest Watchdog Timer period in
    order to guarantee that a Guest Watchdog Timer
    virtualized reset will not occur.


9.13 Freezing the Timer Facili-
ties
The debug mechanism provides a means of tempo-
rarily freezing the timers upon a debug event. When-
ever a debug event is set in the Debug Status Register,
all timers will be frozen by preventing the Time Base
from incrementing. This allows a debugger to simulate
the appearance of ‘real time’, even though the applica-
tion has been temporarily ‘halted’ to service the debug
event. See the description of bit 63 of the Debug Con-
trol Register 0 (Freeze Timers on Debug Event or
DBCR0FT) in Section 10.5.1.1 on page 1221.




1212      Power ISA™ - Book III-E
                                                                                                     Version 2.07



