                                                               Chapter 10. Debug Facilities               1227
Version 2.07


10.6 Debugger Notify Halt Instruction
The dnh instruction provides the means for the transfer
of information between the thread and an implementa-
tion-dependent external debug facility. dnh also causes
the thread to stop fetching and executing instructions.

Debugger Notify Halt                          XFX-form
dnh              DUI,DUIS


      19         DUI        DUIS               198            /
0            6         11               21                    31



if enabled by implementation-dependent means
then
   implementation-dependent register   DUI
   halt thread
else
   illegal instruction exception
Execution of the dnh instruction causes the thread to
stop fetching instructions and taking interrupts if execu-
tion of the instruction has been enabled. The contents
of the DUI field are sent to the external debug facility to
identify the reason for the halt.
If execution of the dnh instruction has not been previ-
ously enabled, executing the dnh instruction produces
an Illegal Instruction exception. The means by which
execution of the dnh instruction is enabled is imple-
mentation-dependent.
The current state of the debug facility, whether the
thread is in IDM or EDM mode has no effect on the exe-
cution of the dnh instruction.
The instruction is context synchronizing.

       Programming Note
    The DUIS field in the instruction may be used to
    pass information to an external debug facility. After
    the dnh instruction has executed, the instruction
    itself can be read back by the Illegal Instruction
    Interrupt handler or the external debug facility if the
    contents of the DUIS field are of interest. If the
    thread entered the Illegal Instruction Interrupt han-
    dler, software can use SRR0 to obtain the address
    of the dnh instruction which caused the handler to
    be invoked.

Special Registers Altered:
    None




1228         Power ISA™ - Book III-E
                                                                                                   Version 2.07



