                                                    Chapter 6. Storage Control Instructions                   1311
Version 2.07


6.2 Cache Management Instruc-                              6.5 Instruction Alignment and
tions                                                      Byte Ordering
Cache management instructions implemented by cate-         Only Big-Endian instruction memory is supported when
gory VLE are identical to those defined in Book II and     executing from a page of VLE instructions. Attempting
Book III-E.                                                to fetch VLE instructions from a page marked as Lit-
                                                           tle-Endian generates an instruction storage interrupt
The Cache Management instructions from Book II,
                                                           byte-ordering exception.
dcba, dcbf, dcbst, dcbt, dcbtst, dcbz, icbi, and icbt
are available while executing in VLE mode. The mne-
monics, decoding, and semantics for these instructions
are identical to those in Book II; see Section 4.3 of
Book II for the instruction definitions.
The Cache Management instruction from Book III-E,
dcbi is available while executing in VLE mode. The
mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for this instruc-
tion are identical to those in Book III-E; see
Section 6.11.1 of Book III-E for the instruction defini-
tion.


6.3 Cache Locking Instructions
Cache locking instructions implemented by category
VLE are identical to those defined in Book III-E. If the
Cache Locking instructions are implemented in cate-
gory VLE, the Category: Embedded Cache Locking
must also be implemented.
The Cache Locking instructions from Book III-E,
dcbtls, dcbtstls, dcblc, dcblq., icbtls, icblq., and
icblc are available while executing in VLE mode. The
mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these instruc-
tions are identical to those in Book III-E; see
Section 6.11.2 of Book III-E for the instruction defini-
tions.


6.4 TLB Management Instruc-
tions
The TLB Management instructions implemented by cat-
egory VLE are identical to those defined in Book III-E.
The TLB Management instructions from Book III-E,
tlbre, tlbwe, tlbivax, tlbilx, tlbsync, tlbsrx. <E.TWC>,
and tlbsx are available while executing in VLE mode.
The mnemonics, decoding, and semantics for these
instructions are identical to those in Book III-E. See
Section 6.11.4.9 of Book III-E.
Instructions and resources described in Chapter 6 of
Book III-E are available if the appropriate category is
implemented.




1312       Power ISA™ - Book VLE
                                                                                                     Version 2.07



