Chapter 3
Instruction Model
This chapter provides additional information about the Power Architecture Book E as it relates specifically
to e200.
The e200z0 and e200z0h cores are a 32-bit implementation of the Power Architecture Book E as defined
in Power Architecture Book E Specification v 2.0. This architecture specification includes a recognition
that different processor implementations may require clarifications, extensions or deviations from the
architectural descriptions. e200z0 and e200z0h are unique in that they support only the VLE instruction
set encodings. The VLE APU is described in PowerPC VLE, version 1.01.

3.1        Unsupported Instructions and Instruction Forms
The e200 core does not support the instructions listed in Table 3-1. An unimplemented instruction
exception is generated if the processor attempts to execute one of these instructions.
                                       Table 3-1. List of Unsupported Instructions

                                 Type/Name                                      Mnemonics

                 String Instructions                            lswi, lswx, stswi, stswx

                 Device control register and Move from APID mfapidi, mfdcrx, mtdcrx


3.2        Optionally Supported Instructions and Instruction Forms
e200 cores optionally supports the instructions listed in Table 3-2 if a cache and/or TLB is present. An
instruction exception may be generated if the processor attempts to execute one of these instructions and
the related functional block is not present, or the specific instruction may be treated as a no-op.
                                Table 3-2. List of Optionally Supported Instructions

              Type/Name                                   Mnemonics                                      Unit

  Cache Management Instructions1        dcba, dcbf, dcbi, dcbt, dcbtst, dcbst, dcbz,       Data Cache/ Unified Cache
                                        icbi, icbt                                         Instruction Cache/Unified Cache

  Cache Locking Instructions2           dcbtls, dcbtstls, dcblc,                           Data Cache/ Unified Cache
                                        icbtls, icblc                                      Instruction Cache/Unified Cache

  TLB Management Instructions3          tlbivax, tlbre, tlbsx, tlbsync, tlbwe              TLB

  DCR Management3                       mfdcr, mtdcr                                       DCR
  1 These instructions are not supported and are treated as no-ops, with the exception of dcbz which results in an
    Alignment Interrupt, and dcbi, which is treated as a privileged no-op.
  2 These instructions are not supported and are treated as no-ops.
  3
    These instructions are not supported and are treated as unimplemented.


                                e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                      3-1
Instruction Model


3.3        Memory Access Alignment Support
The e200 core provides hardware support for unaligned memory accesses; however, there is a performance
degradation for accesses that cross a 32-bit (4-byte) boundary. For these cases, the throughput of the
load/store unit is degraded to 1 misaligned load every 2 cycles. Stores that are misaligned across a 32-bit
(4-byte) boundary can be translated at a rate of 2 cycles per store. Frequent use of unaligned memory
accesses result in an impact on performance.
                                                      NOTE
                    Accesses that cross a 32-bit boundary may be restarted.

3.4        Memory Synchronization and Reservation Instructions
The msync instruction provides a synchronization function and a memory barrier function. This instruction
waits for all preceding instructions and data memory accesses to complete before the msync instruction
completes. Subsequent instructions in the instruction stream are not initiated until after the msync
instruction ensures these functions have been performed.
On the e200 core, the mbar instruction behaves identically to the msync instruction. The mbar instruction
MO field is ignored by the e200 core.
The e200 core implements the lwarx and stwcx. instructions as described in Book E. If the EA is not a
multiple of 4 for either instruction, an alignment interrupt is invoked.
As allowed by Power Architecture Book E, the e200 core does not require that for a stwcx. instruction to
succeed, the EA of the stwcx. instruction must be to the same reservation granule as the EA of a preceding
lwarx instruction. Reservation granularity is implementation-dependent. The e200 core does not define a
reservation granule explicitly; reservation granularity is defined by external logic. When no external logic
is provided, the e200 core performs no address comparison checking, thus the effective implementation
granularity is “null”.
The e200 core implements an internal reservation status flag (HID1[ATS]) representing reservation status.
This flag is set when a lwarx instruction is executed and completes without error, and remains set until it
is cleared by one of the following mechanisms:
    • Execution of a stwcx. instruction is completed without error, or
    • The e200 core p_rsrv_clr input signal is asserted, or
    • The reservation is invalidated when an external input, critical input (on e200z0), or non-maskable
        interrupt (on e200z0h) is signaled and the HID0[ICR] bit is set.
When the e200 core decodes a stwcx. instruction, it checks the value of the local reservation flag
(HID1[ATS]). If the status indicates that no reservation is active, then the stwcx. instruction is treated as
a nop. No exceptions are taken, and no access is performed, thus no data breakpoint occurs, regardless of
matching the data breakpoint attributes.
 The e200 core provides the input signal p_hresp[2:0], which is sampled at termination of a stwcx. store
transfer to allow an external agent or mechanism to indicate that the stwcx. instruction has failed to update
memory, even though a reservation existed for the store at the time it was issued. This is not considered an



                               e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
3-2                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


error, and causes the condition codes for the stwcx. instruction to be written as if a reservation did not exist
for the stwcx. instruction. In addition, any outstanding reservation is cleared.
The p_rsrv_clr input signal is not intended for normal use in managing reservations. It is provided for
specialized system applications. The normal bus protocol is used to manage reservations using external
reservation logic in systems with multiple coherent bus masters, using the transfer type and transfer
response signals. In single coherent master systems, no external logic is required, and the internal
reservation flag is sufficient to support multi-tasking applications.

3.5       Branch Prediction
In the e200z0h, the instruction fetching mechanism uses a branch target buffer to detect branch instructions
early. This branch instruction lookahead scheme allows branch targets to be fetched early, thereby hiding
some taken branch bubbles.

3.6       Interruption of Instructions by Interrupt Requests
In general, the e200 core samples pending non-maskable interrupts, external input, and critical input
interrupt requests at instruction boundaries. However, in order to reduce interrupt latency, long running
instructions may be interrupted prior to completion. Instructions in this class include divides (divw[uo][.]),
load multiple word and store multiple word. When interrupted prior to completion, the value saved in
SRR0/CSRR0 is the address of the interrupted instruction. The instruction is restarted from the beginning
after returning from the interrupt handler.

3.7       New e200 Instructions
The e200 core implements the Freescale EIS isel APU as described below which extends the Power
Architecture Book E instruction set. The e200 wait instruction implements a wait for interrupt function
and is described below. The e200 se_rfdi instruction returns from a Debug interrupt and is also described
below.

3.7.1        ISEL APU
The ISEL APU defines the isel instruction which provides a means to select one of two registers and place
the result in a destination register under the control of a predicate value supplied by a bit in the condition
register. This instruction can be used to eliminate branches in software and in many cases improve
performance. This instruction can also increase program execution time determinism by eliminating the
need to predict the target and direction of the branches replaced by the integer select function. The
instruction form and definition is as follows.




                            e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       3-3
Instruction Model



isel                                                                                                                      isel
Integer Select

isel                    RT, RA, RB, crb

               31                 RT                           RA                    RB                    crb           01111      0

       0                5   6                10       11                15 16                 20 21              25 26           30 31


           if RA=0 then a ← 320 else a ← GPR(RA)
           c = CRcrb
           if c then GPR(RT) ← a
           else GPR(RT) ← GPR(RB)
For isel, if the bit of the CR specified by (crb) is set, the contents of RA|0 are copied into RT. If the bit of
the CR specified by (crb) is clear, the contents of RB are copied into RT.
Other registers altered:
    • None

3.7.2          Debug APU
e200 implements the EIS Debug APU, as documented in the EREF: A Programmer’s Reference Manual
for Freescale Book E Processors, to support the capability to handle the Debug interrupt as an additional
interrupt level. To support this interrupt level, a new “return from debug interrupt” (se_rfdi) instruction is
defined as part of the Debug APU, along with a new pair of save/restore registers, DSRR0, and DSRR1.
When the Debug APU is enabled (HID0[DAPUEN] = 1), the se_rfdi instruction provides a means to
return from a debug interrupt. See Section 2.3.9, “Hardware Implementation Dependent Register 0
(HID0),” for more information about enabling the Debug APU.
The instruction forms and definition are as follows.


se_rfdi                                                                                                          se_rfdi
Return From Debug Interrupt

se_rfdi

                                 0   0   0        0    0   0    0   0    0   0   0    0   0    1   0   1    0

                                 0                                                                          15


           MSR ←DSRR1
           PC ←DSRR032:62 || 0b0




                                e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
3-4                                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                               Instruction Model


The se_rfdi instruction is used to return from a Debug interrupt, or as a means of simultaneously
establishing a new context and synchronizing on that new context.
The contents of Debug Save/Restore Register 1 are place into the Machine State Register. If the new
Machine State Register value does not enable any pending exceptions, then the next instruction is fetched,
under control of the new Machine State Register value from the address DSRR0 32:62|| 0b0. If the new
Machine State Register value enables one or more pending exceptions, the interrupt associated with the
highest priority pending exception is generated; in this case the value placed into Save/Restore Register 0
or Critical Save/Restore Register 0 by the interrupt processing mechanism is the address of the instruction
that would have been executed next had the interrupt not occurred (such as the address in Debug
Save/Restore Register 0 at the time of the execution of the se_rfdi).
Execution of this instruction is privileged and context synchronizing.
Special Registers Altered:
   • MSR
When the Debug APU is disabled (HID0[DAPUEN]=0), this instruction is treated as an illegal instruction.

3.7.3          WAIT APU
The wait instruction allows software to cease all synchronous activity, waiting for an asynchronous
interrupt to occur. The instruction can be used to cease processor activity in both user and supervisor
modes. Asynchronous interrupts which cause the waiting state to be exited if enabled are critical input,
external input, machine check pin (p_mcp_b). Nonmaskable interrupts (p_nmi_b) also cause the waiting
state to be exited.


wait                                                                                                       wait
Wait for Interrupt
wait
       0                   5   6            10 11          15 16           20 21                                        31

       0   1   1   1   1   1                         ///                       0   0   0   0   1   1   1   1    1   0   /


The wait instruction provides an ordering function for the effects of all instructions executed by the
processor executing the wait instruction and stops synchronous processor activity. Executing a wait
instruction ensures that all instructions have completed before the wait instruction completes, causes
processor instruction fetching to cease, and ensures that no subsequent instructions are initiated until an
asynchronous interrupt or a debug interrupt occurs.
Once the wait instruction has completed, the program counter points to the next sequential instruction. The
saved value in xSRR0 when the processor re-initiates activity points to the instruction following the wait
instruction.
Execution of a wait instruction places the CPU in the “waiting” state and is indicated by assertion of the
p_waiting output signal. The signal is negated after leaving the “waiting” state.



                                   e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                      3-5
Instruction Model


Software must ensure that interrupts responsible for exiting the waiting state are enabled before executing
a wait instruction.

3.8        Unimplemented SPRs and Read-Only SPRs
e200 fully decodes the SPR field of the mfspr and mtspr instructions. If the SPR specified is undefined
and not privileged, an illegal instruction exception is generated. If the SPR specified is undefined and
privileged and the CPU is in user mode (MSR[PR=1]), a privileged instruction exception is generated. If
the SPR specified is undefined and privileged and the core is in supervisor mode (MSR[PR=0]), an illegal
instruction exception is generated.
For the mtspr instruction, if the SPR specified is read-only and not privileged, an illegal instruction
exception is generated. If the SPR specified is read-only and privileged and the core is in user mode
(MSR[PR=1]), a privileged instruction exception is generated. If the SPR specified is read-only and
privileged and the core is in supervisor mode (MSR[PR=0]), an illegal instruction exception is generated.
For e200z0 and e200z0h, the following SPRs are not implemented and attempted access via a mtspr or
mfspr instruction results in an unimplemented instruction exception, unless the register is privileged and
the access attempt is made in user mode, in which case a privileged instruction exception occurs.

                                           Table 3-3. List of Unimplemented SPRs

                                        Type                                         Name

                    TImebase                                     DEC, DECAR, TCR, TSR, TBU, TBL
                    Software-Use Special Purpose Registers       USPRG0, SPRG2-7
                    Interrupt Vector Offset Registers            IVOR0-151
                1
                     These SPRs are hardwired to specific values, and are readable, but a mtspr results in
                     an unimplemented or privileged exception.



3.9        Invalid Forms of Instructions

3.9.1         Load and Store with Update Instructions
Power Architecture Book E defines the case when a load with update instruction specifies the same register
in the RT and RA field of the instruction as an invalid format. For this invalid case, the e200 core performs
the instruction and update the register with the load data. In addition, if RA=0 for any load or store with
update instruction, the e200 core updates RA (GPR0).

3.9.2         Load Multiple Word (e_lmw) Instruction
Power Architecture Book E defines as invalid any form of the e_lmw instruction in which RA is in the
range of registers to be loaded, including the case in which RA=0. On e200, invalid forms of the e_lmw
instruction is executed as follows:
    • Case 1: RA is in the range of RT, RA!=0. In this case, address generation for individual loads to
        register targets in is done using the architectural value of RA which existed when beginning

                                   e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
3-6                                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                               Instruction Model


        execution of this e_lmw instruction. RA is overwritten with a value fetched from memory as if it
        had not been the base register. Note that if the instruction is interrupted and restarted, the base
        address may be different if RA has been overwritten.
    •   Case 2: RA=0 and RT=0. In this case, address generation for all loads to register targets RT=0 to
        RT=31 is done substituting the value of 0 for the RA operand.

3.9.3        Instructions with Reserved Fields Non-Zero
Power Architecture Book E defines certain bit fields in various instructions as reserved and specifies that
these fields be set to zero. Per the Book E recommendation, e200 ignores the value of the reserved field
(bit 31) in X-form integer load and store instructions. For all other instructions, e200 generates an illegal
instruction exception if a reserved field is non-zero.

3.10      Optionally Supported APU Instructions
e200 cores optionally support several APUs. If a core does not implement a particular APU, it may treat
these instructions as illegal, or may treat them as unimplemented. e200z0 and e200z0h treat the Embedded
Floating-Point APU instructions (efsxxx, brinc) as unimplemented instructions because other cores of the
e200 family implement this APU. All other non-supported APUs are treated as illegal instructions.




                           e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     3-7
Instruction Model




                    e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
3-8                                                                           Freescale Semiconductor