Chapter 7
Power Management
7.1 Power Management
Power management is supported by e200 cores to minimize overall system power consumption. The e200
core provides the ability to initiate power management from external sources as well as through software
techniques. The power states on the e200 core are described below.

7.1.1 Active State
The Active state is the default state for the e200 core in which all of its internal units are operating at full
processor clock speed. In this state, the e200 core still provides dynamic power management in which
individual internal functional units may stop clocking automatically whenever they are idle.

7.1.2 Waiting State
The e200 core enters the Waiting state as a result of executing a wait instruction. Following entry into the
waiting state, instruction execution and bus activity is suspended. Most internal clocks are gated off in this
state. The e200 core asserts p_waiting to indicate it is in the waiting state. Prior to entering the waiting
state, all outstanding instructions and bus transactions are completed. The m_clk input should remain
running while in the waiting state to allow for interrupt sampling, and to allow further transitions into the
Halted or Stopped state if requested.
In the waiting state, the core is waiting for a valid unmasked pending interrupt request. Once a pending
interrupt request is received, the core exits the waiting state and begin interrupt processing. The return
program counter value points to the next instruction after the wait instruction. The interrupt can be an
external input interrupt, various critical interrupts, a debug interrupt (based on ICMP), a non-maskable
interrupt (on e200z0h), or a machine check interrupt (p_mcp_b assertion, etc.). Once the interrupt
processing begins, the core does not return to the waiting state until another wait instruction is executed.
The waiting state can be temporarily exited and returned to if a request is made to enter hardware debug
mode (various mechanisms), the Halted state, or the Stopped state. After exiting one of these states, the
processor returns to the waiting state. While temporarily exited, the p_waiting output negates, and is
re-asserted once the CPU returns to the waiting state.

7.1.3 Halted State
Instruction execution and bus activity is suspended in the Halted state. However, none of the internal
clocks are gated off in this state. The e200 core asserts p_halted to indicate it is in the halted state. Prior to
entering the halted state, all outstanding bus transactions are completed. The m_clk input should remain
running while in the Halted state to allow further transitions into the Stopped state if requested.


                             e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        7-1
Power Management


7.1.4 Stopped State
The Stopped state is characterized as having all internal functional units of the e200 core stopped except
the clock control state machine logic. The internal m_clk may be kept running to allow quick recovery to
the full on state. Clocks are not running to functional units in this state. The Stopped state is reached after
transitioning through the Halted state with the p_stop input asserted. The p_stopped output signal is
asserted once the Powerdown state is reached.
While in the Stopped state, further power savings may be achieved by stopping the m_clk input. This is
done externally by the system after the e200 core is safely in the Stopped state and has asserted the
p_stopped output signal. To exit from the Stopped state, the system must first restart the m_clk input.

7.1.5 Power Management Pins
p_waiting—output pin asserted when the e200 core is in the Waiting state.
p_halt—input pin is asserted by system logic to request the core to go into the Halted state. Negating this
pin causes the e200 core to transition back into the Active or Waiting state if p_stop is also negated.
p_halted—output pin asserted when the e200 core is in the Halted state.
p_stop—input pin is asserted by system logic to request that the e200 core go into the Powerdown state.
Negating this pin causes the e200 core to transition back into the Halted state from the Stopped state.
p_stopped—output pin asserted when the e200 core is in the Stopped state.
p_doze, p_nap, and p_sleep output pins that reflects the state of HID0[DOZE]. HID0[NAP]., and
HID0[SLEEP] respectively. These pins are qualified with MSR[WE] = 1. Interpretation of these signals is
done by the system logic.
p_wakeup—output pin asserted when an interrupt is pending or other condition which requires the clock
to be running.

7.1.6 Power Management Control Bits
The following bits are used by software to generate a request to enter a power-saving state and to choose
the state to be entered:
    • MSR[WE]—The WE bit is used to qualify assertion of the p_doze, p_nap, and p_sleep output
        pins to the system logic. When MSR[WE] is negated, these pins are negated. When MSR[WE] is
        set, these pins reflect the state of their respective control bits in the HID0 register.
    • HID0[DOZE]—The interpretation of the doze mode bit is done by the external system logic. Doze
        mode on the e200 core is intended to be the halted state with the clocks running.
    • HID0[NAP]—The interpretation of the nap mode bit is done by the external system logic. Nap
        mode on the e200 core may be used for a powerdown state with the Time Base enabled.
    • HID0[SLEEP]—The interpretation of the sleep mode bit is done by the external system logic.
        Sleep mode on the e200 core may be used for a powerdown state with the Time Base disabled.




                            e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
7-2                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                           Power Management


7.1.7 Software Considerations for Power Management Using Wait
      Instructions
Executing a wait instruction causes the e200 core to complete instruction fetch and execution activity and
await an interrupt. The p_waiting output is asserted once the Waiting state is entered. External system
hardware may interpret the state of this signal and activate the p_halt and/or p_stop inputs to cause the
e200 core to enter a quiescent state in which clocks may be disabled for low power operation.
Alternatively, system hardware may utilize some other clock control mechanism while the processor is in
the Waiting state, and p_wakeup remains negated.

7.1.8 Software Considerations for Power Management Using Doze, Nap
      or Sleep
Setting MSR[WE] generates a request to enter a power saving state. The power saving state (doze, nap, or
sleep) must be previously determined by setting the appropriate HID0 bit. Setting MSR[WE] has no direct
effect on instruction execution, but it simply reflected on p_doze, p_nap, and p_sleep depending on the
setting of HID0[DOZE], HID0[NAP], and HID0[SLEEP] respectively. Note that the e200 core is not
affected by assertion of these pins directly. External system hardware may interpret the state of these
signals and activate the p_halt and/or p_stop inputs to cause the e200 core to enter a quiescent state in
which clocks may be disabled for low power operation.
To ensure a clean transition into and out of a power saving mode, the following program sequence is
recommended:
                     sync
                     mtmsr (WE)
                     isync
                     loop:br loop     (optionally use a wait instruction)
An interrupt is typically used to exit a power saving state. The p_wakeup output is used to indicate to the
system logic that an interrupt (or a debug request) has become pending. System logic uses this output to
re-enable the clocks and exit a low power state. The interrupt handler is responsible for determining how
to exit the low power branching loop if one is used. Wait instructions are exited automatically. The
vectored interrupt capability provided by the core may be useful in assisting the determination if an
external hardware interrupt is used to perform the wake-up.

7.1.9 Debug Considerations for Power Management
When a debug request is presented to the e200 core while in either the Waiting, Halted or Stopped state,
the p_wakeup signal is asserted, and when m_clk is provided to the CPU, it temporarily exits the Waiting,
Halted or Stopped state and enters Debug mode regardless of the assertion of p_halt or p_stop. The
p_waiting, p_halted or p_stopped outputs are negated for the duration of the time the CPU remains in a
debug session (jd_debug_b asserted). When the debug session is exited, the CPU re-samples the p_halt
and p_stop inputs and re-enters the Halted or Stopped state as appropriate. If the CPU was previously
waiting, and no interrupt was received while in the debug session, it re-enters the Waiting state and
re-asserts p_waiting.




                           e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                 7-3
Power Management




                   e200z0 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 0
7-4                                                                          Freescale Semiconductor