Chapter 3
Instruction Model
This chapter provides additional information about the Book E architecture as it relates specifically to the
e200z3 and e200z335 cores.
The e200z3 is a 32-bit implementation of the Book E architecture. The Book E architecture specification
includes a recognition that different processor implementations may require clarifications, extensions, or
deviations from the architectural descriptions. Book E instructions are described in the EREF: A
Programmer's Reference Manual for Freescale Book E Processors.

3.1       Operand Conventions
This section describes operand conventions as they are represented in the Book E architecture. These
conventions follow the basic descriptions in the classic PowerPC architecture with some changes in
terminology. For example, distinctions between user- and supervisor-level instructions are maintained, but
the designations—UISA, VEA, and OEA—do not apply. Detailed descriptions are provided on
conventions used for storing values in registers and memory, for accessing processor registers, and for
representing data in these registers.

3.1.1        Data Organization in Memory and Data Transfers
Bytes in memory are numbered consecutively starting with 0. Each number is the address of the
corresponding byte.
Memory operands can be bytes, half-words, words, or double-words (consisting of two 32-bit elements)
or, for the load/store multiple instruction type, a sequence of bytes or words. The address of a memory
operand is the address of its first byte (that is, of its lowest-numbered byte). Operand length is implicit for
each instruction.

3.1.2        Alignment and Misaligned Accesses
The e200z3 core provides hardware support for misaligned memory accesses; however, there is
performance degradation for accesses that cross a 64-bit (8-byte) boundary. For loads that hit in the cache,
the throughput of the load/store unit is degraded to 1 misaligned load every 2 cycles. Stores misaligned
across a 64-bit (8 byte) boundary can be translated at a rate of 2 cycles per store. Frequent use of
misaligned memory accesses is discouraged because of the impact on performance.




                            e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     3-1
Instruction Model


                                                       NOTE
                    Accesses that cross a translation boundary may be restarted. A misaligned
                    access that crosses a page boundary is restarted entirely if the second portion
                    of the access causes a TLB miss. This may result in the first portion being
                    accessed twice.
                    Accesses that cross a translation boundary where the endianness changes
                    cause a byte-ordering data storage interrupt.
Note that lmw, stmw, lwarx, and stwcx. instructions that are not word aligned cause an alignment
exception.

3.1.3         e200z3 Floating-Point Implementation
The e200z3 core does not implement the floating-point instructions as they are defined in Book E.
Attempts to execute a Book E–defined floating-point instruction result in an illegal instruction exception.
However, the vector SPFP APU supports single-precision vector (64-bit, two 32-bit operand) instructions,
and the scalar SPFP APU performs single-precision floating-point operations using the lower 32 bits of
the GPRs. These instructions are described in Section 3.10.6, “Embedded Vector and Scalar
Single-Precision Floating-Point APU Instructions.” Unlike the PowerPC UISA, the SPFP APUs store
floating-point values as single-precision values in true 32-bit, single-precision format rather than in a
64-bit double-precision format used with FPRs.

3.2        Unsupported Instructions and Instruction Forms
Because the e200z3 is a 32-bit Book E core, all of the instructions defined for 64-bit implementations of
the Book E architecture are illegal on the e200z3 and cause an illegal instruction exception type program
interruption the e200z3. The e200z3 core does not support the instructions listed in Table 3-1. An
unimplemented instruction or floating-point-unavailable exception is generated if the processor attempts
to execute one of these instructions.

                                          Table 3-1. List of Unsupported Instructions

                                    Type/Name                                   Mnemonics

                    String Instructions                          lswi, lswx, stswi, stswx
                    Floating Point Instructions                  fxxxx, lfxxxx, sfxxxx, mcrfs, mffs, mtfxxx
                    Device control register and Move from APID   mfapidi, mfdcrx, mtdcrx


3.3 Optionally Supported Instructions and Instruction Forms
The e200z3 core optionally supports the instructions listed in Table 3-2 if a cache and/or TLB is present.
An instruction exception may be generated if the processor attempts to execute one of these instructions
and the related functional block is not present, or the specific instruction may be treated as a no-op.




                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-2                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                              Instruction Model


                                   Table 3-2. List of Optionally Supported Instructions

               Type/Name                                  Mnemonics                                    Unit

    Cache management instructions         dcba, dcbf, dcbi, dcbt, dcbtst, dcbst, dcbz Data cache/unified cache
                                          icbi, icbt                                  Instruction cache/unified cache
    Cache locking instructions            dcbtls, dcbtstls, dcblc                       Data cache/unified cache
                                          icbtls, icblc                                 Instruction cache/unified cache
    TLB management instructions           tlbivax, tlbre, tlbsx, tlbsync, tlbwe         TLB
    DCR management                        mfdcr, mtdcr                                  DCR


3.4 Implementation-Specific Instructions
Book E defines some instructions that are implementation specific. Table 3-3 summarizes the e200z3
implementation-specific instructions.

                               Table 3-3. Implementation-Specific Instruction Summary

                          Mnemonic                              Implementation Details

                  mfapidi                 Unimplemented instructions
                  mfdcrx, mtdcrx
                  stwcx.                  Address match with prior lwarx not required for store to be performed
                  mfdcr, mtdcr1           Optionally supported instructions
                  tlbivax
                  tlbre
                  tlbsx
                  tlbsync
                  tlbwe
              1
                   The e200z3 CPU takes an illegal instruction interrupt for unsupported DCR values


3.5 BookE Instruction Extensions
The variable length encoding (VLE) provides an extension to 32-bit PowerPC Book E. There are
additional operations defined using an alternate instruction encoding to enable reduced code footprint.
This alternate encoding set is selected on an instruction page basis. A single page attribute bit selects
between standard PowerPC Book E instruction encodings and VLE instructions for that page of memory.
This page attribute is an extension to the PowerPC Book E page attributes. Pages can be freely intermixed,
allowing for a mixture of code using both types of encodings.
Instruction encodings in pages marked as using the VLE extension are either 16 or 32 bits long, and are
aligned on 16-bit boundaries. Therefore, all instruction pages marked as VLE are required to use
big-endian byte ordering.
This section describes the various extensions to Book E instructions to support the VLE extension.



                                   e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                    3-3
Instruction Model


rfci, rfdi, rfi—no longer mask bit 62 of CSRR0, DSRR0, or SRR0 respectively. The destination address
is [D,C]SRR0[32:62] || 0b0.
bclr, bclrl, bcctr, bcctrl—no longer mask bit 62 of the LR or CTR respectively. The destination address
is [LR,CTR][32:62] || 0b0.

3.6 Memory Access Alignment Support
The e200z3 core provides hardware support for unaligned memory accesses. However, there is a
performance degradation for accesses that cross a 64-bit (8 byte) boundary. For these cases, the
throughput of the load/store unit is degraded to one misaligned load every 2 cycles. Stores misaligned
across a 64-bit (8 byte) boundary can be translated at a rate of 2 cycles per store. Frequent use of
unaligned memory accesses is discouraged because of the impact on performance.
                                                        Note:
                    Accesses that cross a translation boundary may be restarted. A misaligned
                    access that crosses a page boundary is restarted in its entirety in the event
                    of a TLB miss of the second portion of the access. This may result in the
                    first portion being accessed twice.
                    Accesses that cross a translation boundary where endianness changes cause
                    a byte-ordering data storage interrupt.

3.7        Memory Synchronization and Reservation Instructions
Table 3-4 lists the e200z3 implementation details for the memory synchronization and load and store with
reservation instructions.
         Table 3-4. Memory Synchronization and Reservation Instructions—e200z3-Specific Details

Instruction                                              e200z3 Implementation

  msync       Provides synchronization and memory barrier functions. msync completes only after all preceding instructions and
              data memory accesses complete. Subsequent instructions in the stream are not dispatched until after the msync
              ensures these functions have been performed.




                                e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-4                                                                                                  Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                    Instruction Model


  Table 3-4. Memory Synchronization and Reservation Instructions—e200z3-Specific Details (continued)

Instruction                                                 e200z3 Implementation

   mbar       Behaves identically to msync; the mbar MO field is ignored by the e200z3 core.

  lwarx/      Implemented as described in the EREF. If the EA for either instruction is not a multiple of four, an alignment interrupt
  stwcx.      is invoked. The e200z3 allows lwarx and stwcx. to access a page marked as write-through required without
              invoking a data storage interrupt.
              As Book E allows, the e200z3 does not require the EAs for a stwcx. and the preceding lwarx to be to the same
              reservation granule.
              Reservation granularity is implementation dependent. The e200z3 does not define a reservation granule explicitly;
              it is defined by external logic. When no external logic is provided, the e200z3 does not compare addresses; thus,
              the effective implementation granularity is null.
              The e200z3 implements an internal status flag, HID1[ATS], which is set when an lwarx completes without error. It
              remains set until it is cleared by one of the following:
               • An stwcx. executes without error
               • The e200z3 core p_rsrv_clr input is asserted. See Chapter 7, “External Core Complex Interfaces.”
               • The reservation is invalidated when an external interrupt or non-maskable interrupt (in e200z335 only) is
                   signaled and HID0[ICR] is set.
              The e200z3 treats lwarx and stwcx. as cache-inhibited and guarded, regardless of page attributes.
              The e200z3 core input p_xfail_b is sampled at termination of an stwcx. store transfer to allow an external agent or
              mechanism to indicate that the stwcx. failed to update memory, even though a reservation existed for the store
              when it was issued. This is not considered an error and causes the condition codes for the stwcx. to be written as
              if it had no reservation. Also, any outstanding reservation is cleared.


3.8        Branch Prediction
The e200z3 instruction fetching mechanism uses a branch target buffer (BTB), which holds branch target
addresses combined with a 2-bit saturating up-down counter scheme for branch prediction. These bits can
take four values: strongly taken, weakly taken, weakly not taken, and strongly not taken. This mechanism
is described in Section 6.3.5, “Change-of-Flow Instruction Pipeline Operation.”
Branch paths are predicted by a BTB and subsequently checked to see if the prediction was correct. This
enables operation beyond a conditional branch without waiting for the branch to be decoded and resolved.
The instruction fetch unit predicts the direction of the branch as follows:
   • Predict not taken for any branch whose fetch address misses in the BTB or hits in the BTB and is
       predicted not taken by the counter.
   • Predict taken for any branch that hits in the BTB and is predicted taken by the counter.
Note that the static branch prediction bit defined by the Book E architecture in the BO operand is ignored.

3.9        Interruption of Instructions by Interrupt Requests
In general, the e200z3 core samples pending non-maskable interrupts (in e200z335 only), external input
and critical input interrupt requests at instruction boundaries. However, in order to reduce interrupt latency,
long-running instructions may be interrupted prior to completion. Instructions in this class include divides
(divw[uo][.], efsdiv, evfsdiv, evdivw[su]), Load Multiple Word (lmw), and Store Multiple Word (stmw).
When an instruction is interrupted before completion, the value saved in SRR0/CSRR0 is the address of
the interrupted instruction.



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                            3-5
Instruction Model


3.10       e200z3-Specific Instructions
The e200z3 core implements the following instructions that are not defined by the Book E architecture:
   • The EIS-defined integer select (isel) APU consists of the isel instruction, described in
       Section 3.10.1, “Integer Select APU.”
   • The Return from Debug Interrupt instruction (rfdi) is defined by the Freescale Book E debug APU.
       This instruction is described in Section 3.10.2, “Debug APU.”
   • The wait instruction implements a wait for interrupt function and is described in Section 3.10.3,
       “Wait APU (e200z335 only). This instruction is implemented in the e200z335 only.
   • The signal processing extension (SPE) APU provides a set of 64-bit SIMD instructions. These are
       listed in Section 3.10.5, “SPE APU Instructions,” and described in the EREF.
   • The embedded vector and scalar single-precision floating-point APUs are listed along with
       supporting instructions in Section 3.10.6, “Embedded Vector and Scalar Single-Precision
       Floating-Point APU Instructions.” These instructions are described in detail in the EREF.

3.10.1        Integer Select APU
The integer select APU defines the Integer Select (isel) instruction, which provides a means to select one
of two registers and place the result in a destination register under the control of a predicate value supplied
by a bit in the condition register. isel can be used to eliminate branches in software and in many cases
improve performance; it can also increase program execution time determinism by eliminating the need to
predict the target and direction of the branches replaced by the integer select function.
The isel instruction form and definition are described in the EREF

3.10.2        Debug APU
The e200z3 implements the Freescale Book E debug APU to support the ability to handle the debug
interrupt as an additional interrupt level. To support this interrupt level, the Return from Debug Interrupt
instruction (rfdi) is defined as part of the debug APU, along with a pair of save/restore registers, DSRR0,
and DSRR1.
When the debug APU is enabled (HID0[DAPUEN] = 1), rfdi provides a way to return from a debug
interrupt. See Section 2.13.1, “Hardware Implementation-Dependent Register 0 (HID0),” for more
information about enabling the debug APU.
The instruction form and definition is provided in the EREF.

3.10.3        Wait APU (e200z335 only)
The wait instruction allows software to cease all synchronous activity, waiting for an asynchronous
interrupt to occur. The instruction can be used to cease processor activity in both user and supervisor
modes. Asynchronous interrupts which will cause the waiting state to be exited if enabled are critical input,
external input, machine check input. Nonmaskable interrupts will also cause the waiting state to be exited.
The instruction form and definition is provided in the EREF.


                            e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-6                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                Instruction Model


3.10.4 Volatile Context Save/Restore APU (e200z335 only)
The e200z335 implements the EIS Volatile Context Save/Restore APU to support the capability to
quickly save and restore volatile register context on entry into an interrupt handler. To support this
functionality, a new set of instructions is defined as part of the APU.
    • e_ldmvgprw, e_stmvgprw - load/store multiple volatile gprs (r0, r3:r12)
    • e_ldmvsprw, e_stmvsprw - load/store multiple volatile sprs (CR, LR, CTR, and XER)
    • e_ldmvsrrw, e_stmvsrrw - load/store multiple volatile srrs (SRR0, SRR1)
    • e_ldmvcsrrw, e_stmvcsrrw - load/store multiple volatile csrrs (CSRR0, CSRR1)
    • e_ldmvdsrrw, e_stmvdsrrw - load/store multiple volatile dsrrs (DSRR0, DSRR1)
These instructions are available in VLE instruction pages to perform a multiple register load or store to a
word aligned memory address.

3.10.5          SPE APU Instructions
SPE APU instructions treat 64-bit GPRs as a vector of two 32-bit elements. (Some instructions also read
or write 16-bit elements.) The SPE APU supports a number of forms of multiply and multiply-accumulate
operations, and of add and subtract to accumulator operations. The SPE supports signed and unsigned
forms, and optional fractional forms. For these instructions, the fractional form does not apply to unsigned
forms because integer and fractional forms are identical for unsigned operands.
Table 3-5 shows how SPE APU vector multiply instruction mnemonics are structured.
                         Table 3-5. SPE APU Vector Multiply Instruction Mnemonic Structure

  Prefix             Multiply Element                   Data Type Element                    Accumulate Element

          ho half odd (16x16→32)
           he half even (16x16→32)
                                            usi unsigned saturate integer
          hog half odd guarded (16x16→32)                                    a write to ACC
                                           umi unsigned modulo integer
          heg half even guarded (16x16→32)                                  aa write to ACC & added ACC
                                            ssi signed saturate integer
      evm wh word high (32x32→32)                                           an write to ACC & negate ACC
                                           ssf1 signed saturate fractional
           wl word low (32x32→32)                                          aaw write to ACC & ACC in words
                                           smi signed modulo integer
          whg word high guarded (32x32→32)                                 anw write to ACC & negate ACC in words
                                           smf1 signed modulo fractional
          wlg word low guarded (32x32→32)
           w word (32x32→64)
  1
       Low word versions of signed saturate and signed modulo fractional instructions are not supported. Attempting to execute
       an opcode corresponding to these instructions causes boundedly undefined results.

Table 3-6 defines mnemonic extensions for these instructions.




                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                      3-7
Instruction Model


                         Table 3-6. Mnemonic Extensions for Multiply-Accumulate Instructions

      Extension                   Meaning                                           Comments

                                                         Multiply Form
         he         Half word even                      16×16→32
        heg         Half word even guarded              16×16→32, 64-bit final accumulator result
         ho         Half word odd                       16×16→32
        hog         Half word odd guarded               16×16→32, 64-bit final accumulator result
         w          Word                                32×32→64
         wh         Word high                           32×32→32, high-order 32 bits of product
         wl         Word low                            32×32→32, low-order 32 bits of product
                                                           Data Type
        smf         Signed modulo fractional            (Wrap, no saturate)
        smi         Signed modulo integer               (Wrap, no saturate)
         ssf        Signed saturate fractional
         ssi        Signed saturate integer
        umi         Unsigned modulo integer             (Wrap, no saturate)
         usi        Unsigned saturate integer
                                                      Accumulate Options
         a          Update accumulator                  Update accumulator (no add)
         aa         Add to accumulator                  Add result to accumulator (64-bit sum)
        aaw         Add to accumulator (words)          Add word results to accumulator words (pair of 32-bit sums)
         an         Add negated                         Add negated result to accumulator (64-bit sum)
        anw         Add negated to accumulator (words) Add negated word results to accumulator words (pair of 32-bit sums)




                                     e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-8                                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                       Instruction Model


Table 3-7 lists SPE APU instructions.
                                      Table 3-7. SPE APU Vector Instructions

                                        Instruction                                       Mnemonic        Syntax

  Bit Reversed Increment1                                                                   brinc        rD,rA,rB
  Initialize Accumulator                                                                   evmra           rD,rA
  Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate         evmhegsmfaa      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate Negative evmhegsmfan     rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate            evmhegsmiaa      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative   evmhegsmian      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate          evmhegumiaa      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative evmhegumian      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate          evmhogsmfaa      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate Negative evmhogsmfan      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate             evmhogsmiaa      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative    evmhogsmian      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate           evmhogumiaa      rD,rA,rB
  Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative evmhogumian       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Absolute Value                                                                     evabs          rD,rA
  Vector Add Immediate Word                                                                evaddiw      rD,rB,UIMM
  Vector Add Signed, Modulo, Integer to Accumulator Word                                evaddsmiaaw        rD,rA
  Vector Add Signed, Saturate, Integer to Accumulator Word                               evaddssiaaw       rD,rA
  Vector Add Unsigned, Modulo, Integer to Accumulator Word                              evaddumiaaw        rD,rA
  Vector Add Unsigned, Saturate, Integer to Accumulator Word                             evaddusiaaw       rD,rA
  Vector Add Word                                                                          evaddw        rD,rA,rB
  Vector AND                                                                                evand        rD,rA,rB
  Vector AND with Complement                                                               evandc        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Compare Equal                                                                    evcmpeq        crD,rA,rB
  Vector Compare Greater Than Signed                                                      evcmpgts       crD,rA,rB
  Vector Compare Greater Than Unsigned                                                    evcmpgtu       crD,rA,rB
  Vector Compare Less Than Signed                                                         evcmplts       crD,rA,rB
  Vector Compare Less Than Unsigned                                                       evcmpltu       crD,rA,rB
  Vector Convert Floating-Point from Signed Fraction                                       evfscfsf        rD,rB
  Vector Convert Floating-Point from Signed Integer                                        evfscfsi        rD,rB
  Vector Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Fraction                                     evfscfuf        rD,rB
  Vector Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Integer                                      evfscfui        rD,rB
  Vector Convert Floating-Point to Signed Fraction                                         evfsctsf        rD,rB
  Vector Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer                                          evfsctsi        rD,rB


                               e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                              3-9
Instruction Model


                                    Table 3-7. SPE APU Vector Instructions (continued)

                                            Instruction                                        Mnemonic        Syntax

   Vector Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer with Round toward Zero                      evfsctsiz       rD,rB
   Vector Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Fraction                                           evfsctuf       rD,rB
   Vector Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer                                            evfsctui       rD,rB
   Vector Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer with Round toward Zero                    evfsctuiz       rD,rB
   Vector Count Leading Sign Bits Word                                                         evcntlsw        rD,rA
   Vector Count Leading Zeros Word                                                             evcntlzw        rD,rA
   Vector Divide Word Signed                                                                    evdivws       rD,rA,rB
   Vector Divide Word Unsigned                                                                  evdivwu       rD,rA,rB
   Vector Equivalent                                                                             eveqv        rD,rA,rB
   Vector Extend Sign Byte                                                                      evextsb        rD,rA
   Vector Extend Sign Half Word                                                                 evextsh        rD,rA
   Vector Floating-Point Absolute Value                                                         evfsabs        rD,rA
   Vector Floating-Point Add                                                                    evfsadd       rD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Compare Equal                                                        evfscmpeq       crD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Compare Greater Than                                                  evfscmpgt      crD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Compare Less Than                                                     evfscmplt      crD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Divide                                                                 evfsdiv       rD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Multiply                                                               evfsmul       rD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Negate                                                                 evfsneg        rD,rA
   Vector Floating-Point Negative Absolute Value                                               evfsnabs        rD,rA
   Vector Floating-Point Subtract                                                               evfssub       rD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Test Equal                                                            evfststeq      crD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Test Greater Than                                                     evfststgt      crD,rA,rB
   Vector Floating-Point Test Less Than                                                         evfststlt     crD,rA,rB
   Vector Load Double into Half Words                                                            evldh        rD,d(rA)
   Vector Load Double into Half Words Indexed                                                   evldhx        rD,rA,rB
   Vector Load Double into Two Words                                                             evldw        rD,d(rA)
   Vector Load Double into Two Words Indexed                                                    evldwx        rD,rA,rB
   Vector Load Double Word into Double Word                                                      evldd        rD,d(rA)
   Vector Load Double Word into Double Word Indexed                                             evlddx        rD,rA,rB
   Vector Load Half Word into Half Word Odd Signed and Splat                                  evlhhossplat    rD,d(rA)
   Vector Load Half Word into Half Word Odd Signed and Splat Indexed                      evlhhossplatx       rD,rA,rB
   Vector Load Half Word into Half Word Odd Unsigned and Splat                                evlhhousplat    rD,d(rA)
   Vector Load Half Word into Half Word Odd Unsigned and Splat Indexed                    evlhhousplatx       rD,rA,rB
   Vector Load Half Word into Half Words Even and Splat                                       evlhhesplat     rD,d(rA)


                                    e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-10                                                                                                Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                            Instruction Model


                               Table 3-7. SPE APU Vector Instructions (continued)

                                         Instruction                                          Mnemonic         Syntax

  Vector Load Half Word into Half Words Even and Splat Indexed                               evlhhesplatx     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Load Word into Half Words and Splat                                                  evlwhsplat       rD,d(rA)
  Vector Load Word into Half Words and Splat Indexed                                         evlwhsplatx      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Load Word into Half Words Odd Signed (with sign extension)                            evlwhos         rD,d(rA)
  Vector Load Word into Half Words Odd Signed Indexed (with sign extension)                   evlwhosx        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Load Word into Two Half Words Even                                                    evlwhe          rD,d(rA)
  Vector Load Word into Two Half Words Even Indexed                                            evlwhex        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Load Word into Two Half Words Odd Unsigned (zero-extended)                            evlwhou         rD,d(rA)
  Vector Load Word into Two Half Words Odd Unsigned Indexed (zero-extended)                   evlwhoux        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Load Word into Word and Splat                                                        evlwwsplat       rD,d(rA)
  Vector Load Word into Word and Splat Indexed                                               evlwwsplatx      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Merge High                                                                           evmergehi       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Merge High/Low                                                                      evmergehilo      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Merge Low                                                                            evmergelo       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Merge Low/High                                                                      evmergelohi      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Fractional                                evmhesmf        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate into Words evmhesmfaaw          rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate Negative       evmhesmfanw      rD,rA,rB
  into Words
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Fractional, Accumulate                    evmhesmfa       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Integer                                   evmhesmi        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate into Words        evmhesmiaaw      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative into     evmhesmianw      rD,rA,rB
  Words
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Integer, Accumulate                       evmhesmia       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Fractional                              evmhessf        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate into Words   evmhessfaaw      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate Negative     evmhessfanw      rD,rA,rB
  into Words
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Fractional, Accumulate                  evmhessfa       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate into Words      evmhessiaaw      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative into   evmhessianw      rD,rA,rB
  Words
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                 evmheumi        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate into Words      evmheumiaaw      rD,rA,rB




                               e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                   3-11
Instruction Model


                                Table 3-7. SPE APU Vector Instructions (continued)

                                         Instruction                                          Mnemonic       Syntax

   Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative into evmheumianw     rD,rA,rB
   Words
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer, Accumulate                    evmheumia     rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate into Words   evmheusiaaw    rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative     evmheusianw    rD,rA,rB
   into Words
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Fractional                                evmhosmf      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate into Words     evmhosmfaaw    rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate Negative into evmhosmfanw     rD,rA,rB
   Words
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Fractional, Accumulate                    evmhosmfa     rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Integer                                   evmhosmi      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate into Words        evmhosmiaaw    rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative into     evmhosmianw    rD,rA,rB
   Words
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Integer, Accumulate                       evmhosmia     rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Fractional                              evmhossf      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate into Words   evmhossfaaw    rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate Negative     evmhossfanw    rD,rA,rB
   into Words
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Fractional, Accumulate                  evmhossfa     rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate into Words      evmhossiaaw    rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative into   evmhossianw    rD,rA,rB
   Words
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                 evmhoumi      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate into Words      evmhoumiaaw    rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative into evmhoumianw      rD,rA,rB
   Words
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer, Accumulate                     evmhoumia     rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate into Words    evmhousiaaw    rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative      evmhousianw    rD,rA,rB
   into Words
   Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Modulo, Fractional                                       evmwhsmf      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate                       evmwhsmfa      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Modulo, Integer                                          evmwhsmi      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                          evmwhsmia      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Saturate, Fractional                                     evmwhssf      rD,rA,rB
   Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate                      evmwhssfa     rD,rA,rB


                                e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-12                                                                                              Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                        Instruction Model


                               Table 3-7. SPE APU Vector Instructions (continued)

                                        Instruction                                        Mnemonic        Syntax

  Vector Multiply Word High Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                      evmwhumi       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word High Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                      evmwhumia       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate in Words                evmwlsmiaaw     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative in Words       evmwlsmianw     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate in Words              evmwlssiaaw     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative in Words     evmwlssianw     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                       evmwlsmi       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                        evmwlumia      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate in Words              evmwlumiaaw     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative in Words     evmwlumianw     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate in Words            evmwlusiaaw     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative in Words   evmwlusianw     rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Fractional                                          evmwsmf        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate                           evmwsmfa       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate                          evmwsmfaa       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate Negative                 evmwsmfan       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Integer                                             evmwsmi        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                              evmwsmia       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                             evmwsmiaa       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative                    evmwsmian       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Saturate, Fractional                                         evmwssf       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate                         evmwssfa       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate                         evmwssfaa      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate Negative                evmwssfan      rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                           evmwumi        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                            evmwumia       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                           evmwumiaa       rD,rA,rB
  Vector Multiply Word Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative                  evmwumian       rD,rA,rB
  Vector NAND                                                                               evnand        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Negate                                                                              evneg          rD,rA
  Vector NOR                                                                                 evnor        rD,rA,rB
  Vector OR                                                                                  evor         rD,rA,rB
  Vector OR with Complement                                                                  evorc        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Rotate Left Word                                                                    evrlw        rD,rA,rB
  Vector Rotate Left Word Immediate                                                          evrlwi      rD,rA,UIMM


                               e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                              3-13
Instruction Model


                                   Table 3-7. SPE APU Vector Instructions (continued)

                                            Instruction                                             Mnemonic          Syntax

   Vector Round Word                                                                                 evrndw            rD,rA
   Vector Select                                                                                       evsel       rD,rA,rB,crS
   Vector Shift Left Word                                                                             evslw          rD,rA,rB
   Vector Shift Left Word Immediate                                                                   evslwi       rD,rA,UIMM
   Vector Shift Right Word Immediate Signed                                                          evsrwis       rD,rA,UIMM
   Vector Shift Right Word Immediate Unsigned                                                        evsrwiu       rD,rA,UIMM
   Vector Shift Right Word Signed                                                                    evsrws          rD,rA,rB
   Vector Shift Right Word Unsigned                                                                  evsrwu          rD,rA,rB
   Vector Splat Fractional Immediate                                                                 evsplatfi       rD,SIMM
   Vector Splat Immediate                                                                            evsplati        rD,SIMM
   Vector Store Double of Double                                                                      evstdd         rS,d(rA)
   Vector Store Double of Double Indexed                                                             evstddx         rS,rA,rB
   Vector Store Double of Four Half Words                                                             evstdh         rS,d(rA)
   Vector Store Double of Four Half Words Indexed                                                    evstdhx         rS,rA,rB
   Vector Store Double of Two Words                                                                  evstdw          rS,d(rA)
   Vector Store Double of Two Words Indexed                                                          evstdwx         rS,rA,rB
   Vector Store Word of Two Half Words from Even                                                     evstwhe         rS,d(rA)
   Vector Store Word of Two Half Words from Even Indexed                                            evstwhex         rS,rA,rB
   Vector Store Word of Two Half Words from Odd                                                      evstwho         rS,d(rA)
   Vector Store Word of Two Half Words from Odd Indexed                                             evstwhox         rS,rA,rB
   Vector Store Word of Word from Even                                                               evstwwe         rS,d(rA)
   Vector Store Word of Word from Even Indexed                                                      evstwwex         rS,rA,rB
   Vector Store Word of Word from Odd                                                                evstwwo         rS,d(rA)
   Vector Store Word of Word from Odd Indexed                                                       evstwwox         rS,rA,rB
   Vector Subtract from Word                                                                         evsubfw         rD,rA,rB
   Vector Subtract Immediate from Word                                                              evsubifw       rD,UIMM,rB
   Vector Subtract Signed, Modulo, Integer to Accumulator Word                                    evsubfsmiaaw         rD,rA
   Vector Subtract Signed, Saturate, Integer to Accumulator Word                                  evsubfssiaaw         rD,rA
   Vector Subtract Unsigned, Modulo, Integer to Accumulator Word                                 evsubfumiaaw          rD,rA
   Vector Subtract Unsigned, Saturate, Integer to Accumulator Word                                evsubfusiaaw         rD,rA
   Vector XOR                                                                                         evxor          rD,rA,rB
  1    An implementation can restrict the number of bits specified in a mask. The e200z3 limits it to 16 bits, which allows the
       user to perform bit-reversed address computations for 65536-byte samples.




                                   e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-14                                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                          Instruction Model


3.10.6       Embedded Vector and Scalar Single-Precision Floating-Point APU
             Instructions
The vector and scalar SPFP APUs perform floating-point operations on single-precision operands. These
operations are IEEE-compliant with software interrupt handlers and offer a simpler interrupt model than
the floating-point instructions defined by the PowerPC ISA. Instead of FPRs, these instructions use GPRs
and offer improved performance for converting between floating-point, integer, and fractional values.
Sharing GPRs allows vector floating-point instructions to use SPE load and store instructions.
The two SPFP APUs are described as follows:
   • Vector SPFP instructions operate on a vector of two 32-bit, single-precision floating-point numbers
      that reside in the upper and lower halves of the 64-bit GPRs. These instructions are listed in
      Table 3-8 alongside their scalar equivalents.
   • Scalar SPFP instructions operate on single 32-bit operands that reside in the lower 32 bits of the
      GPRs. These instructions are listed in Table 3-8.
                                                    NOTE
                 Both the vector and scalar versions of the instructions have the same syntax.
                       Table 3-8. Vector and Scalar SPFP APU Floating-Point Instructions

                                                                                   Mnemonic
                                       Instruction                                                       Syntax
                                                                              Scalar         Vector

         Convert Floating-Point from Signed Fraction                          efscfsf     evfscfsf        rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point from Signed Integer                           efscfsi        evfscfsi     rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Fraction                        efscfuf     evfscfuf        rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Integer                         efscfui     evfscfui        rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point to Signed Fraction                            efsctsf     evfsctsf        rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer                             efsctsi        evfsctsi     rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer with Round toward Zero      efsctsiz   evfsctsiz        rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Fraction                          efsctuf     evfsctuf        rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer                           efsctui     evfsctui        rD,rB

         Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer with Round toward Zero    efsctuiz   evfsctuiz        rD,rB

         Floating-Point Absolute Value                                        efsabs         evfsabs      rD,rA

         Floating-Point Add                                                   efsadd      evfsadd       rD,rA,rB

         Floating-Point Compare Equal                                        efscmpeq    evfscmpeq      crD,rA,rB

         Floating-Point Compare Greater Than                                 efscmpgt    evfscmpgt      crD,rA,rB

         Floating-Point Compare Less Than                                    efscmplt    evfscmplt      crD,rA,rB

         Floating-Point Divide                                                efsdiv         evfsdiv    rD,rA,rB

         Floating-Point Multiply                                              efsmul      evfsmul       rD,rA,rB




                                   e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                               3-15
Instruction Model


                Table 3-8. Vector and Scalar SPFP APU Floating-Point Instructions (continued)

                                                                                       Mnemonic
                                      Instruction                                                             Syntax
                                                                                  Scalar          Vector

         Floating-Point Negate                                                   efsneg           evfsneg      rD,rA

         Floating-Point Negative Absolute Value                                  efsnabs      evfsnabs         rD,rA

         Floating-Point Subtract                                                 efssub           evfssub     rD,rA,rB

         Floating-Point Test Equal                                               efststeq     evfststeq      crD,rA,rB

         Floating-Point Test Greater Than                                        efststgt     evfststgt      crD,rA,rB

         Floating-Point Test Less Than                                           efststlt     evfststlt      crD,rA,rB


3.10.6.1        Options for Embedded Floating-Point APU Implementations
Table 3-9 lists implementation options allowed by the embedded floating-point architecture and describes
how the e200z3 handles those options.
                                   Table 3-9. Embedded Floating-Point APU Options

                                             Option                                                   e200z3 Implementation

Overflow and underflow conditions may be signaled by doing exponent evaluation of the operation. Follows the
If an examining of the exponents determines that an overflow or underflow could occur, the       recommendation; does not
implementation may choose to signal an overflow or underflow.                                    use the estimation.

If an operand for a calculation or conversion is denormalized, the implementation may choose to      Uses a same-signed zero
use a same-signed zero value in place of the denormalized operand.                                   value in place of the
                                                                                                     denormalized operand.

+Infinity and -Infinity rounding modes are not required to be handled by an implementation. If an Supports rounding to
implementation does not support ±Infinity rounding modes and the rounding mode is set to be          ±Infinity.
+Infinity or -Infinity, an embedded floating-point round interrupt occurs after every floating-point
instruction for which rounding may occur, regardless of the value of FINXE, unless an embedded
floating-point data interrupt also occurs and is taken.

For absolute value, negate, and negative absolute value operations, an implementation may            A sign bit operation is
choose either to simply perform the sign bit operation recognizing interrupts or to compute the      performed; interrupts are
operation and handle exceptions and saturation where appropriate.                                    taken.

SPEFSCR FGH and FXH bits are undefined upon the completion of a scalar floating-point                Always clears these bits for
operation. An implementation may choose to clear them or leave them unchanged.                       such operations.

An implementation may choose to only implement sticky bit setting by hardware for FDBZS and          Implements all sticky bit
FINXS, allowing software to manage the other sticky bits. It is recommended that all future          settings in hardware.
implementations implement all sticky bit settings in hardware.


3.11       Unimplemented SPRs and Read-Only SPRs
The e200z3 fully decodes the SPR field of mfspr and mtspr instructions. If the SPR specified is undefined
and not privileged, an illegal instruction exception is generated. If the SPR specified is undefined and
privileged and the CPU is in user mode (MSR[PR] = 1), a privileged instruction exception is generated. If



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-16                                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                     Instruction Model


the SPR specified is undefined and privileged and the CPU is in supervisor mode (MSR[PR] = 0), an illegal
instruction exception is generated.
For mtspr, if the SPR specified is read-only and not privileged, an illegal instruction exception is
generated. If the SPR specified is read-only and privileged and the CPU is in user mode (MSR[PR] = 1, a
privileged instruction exception is generated. If the SPR specified is read-only and privileged and the CPU
is in supervisor mode (MSR[PR] = 0), an illegal instruction exception is generated.

3.12       Invalid Instruction Forms
Table 3-10 describes invalid instruction forms.
                                           Table 3-10. Invalid Instruction Forms

 Instructions                                                       Descriptions

Load and store Book E defines as an invalid form the case when a load with update instruction specifies the same register in
with update    the rD and rA field of the instruction. For this invalid case, the e200z3 core performs the instruction and updates
               the register with the load data. In addition, if rA = 0 for any load or store with update instruction, the e200z3
               core updates rA (GPR0).

Load Multiple    Book E defines as invalid any form of the lmw instruction in which rA is in the range of registers to be loaded,
Word (lmw)       including the case in which rA = 0. On the e200z3, invalid forms of lmw execute as follows:
                  • Case 1: rA is in the range of rD, rA ≠ 0. In this case address generation for individual loads to register targets
                    is done using the architectural value of rA which existed when beginning execution of this lmw instruction.
                    rA is overwritten with a value fetched from memory as if it had not been the base register. Note that if the
                    instruction is interrupted and restarted, the base address may be different if rA has been overwritten.
                  • Case 2: rA = 0 and rD = 0. In this case address generation for all loads to register targets rD = 0 to rD = 31
                    is done substituting the value of 0 for rA.

Branch           Book E defines as invalid any bcctr or bcctrl instruction that specifies the decrement and test CTR (BO[2] = 0)
Conditional to   option. The e200z3 executes instructions with these invalid forms by decrementing the CTR and branching to
Count            the location specified by the pre-decremented CTR value if all CR and CTR conditions are met as specified by
Register [and    the other BO field settings.
Link]

Instructions    Book E defines certain bit fields in various instructions as reserved and specifies that these fields be set to zero.
with non-zero Following the Book E recommendation, the e200z3 ignores the value of the reserved field (bit 31) in X-form
reserved fields integer load and store instructions. The e200z3 ignores the value of the reserved ‘z’ bits in the BO field of
                branch instructions. For all other instructions, the e200z3 generates an illegal instruction exception if a reserved
                field is non-zero.


3.13       Instruction Summary
In addition to the SPE instructions listed in Table 3-7 and the floating-point instructions listed in Table 3-8,
the e200z3 implements the instructions defined in Table 3-11 and Table 3-12. Instructions not listed in
these tables are not supported by the e200z3 core and signal an illegal, unimplemented, or floating-point
unavailable exception. Implementation-dependent instructions are identified with a footnote.
Instructions that are optionally supported (when an optional function is added to the base core) are shown
with shaded entries.




                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                           3-17
Instruction Model


Note that specific APUs are not included in the table below:
   • SPE APU
   • VLE extension

3.13.1        Instruction Index Sorted by Mnemonic
Table 3-11 lists instructions by mnemonic.
                                       Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic

                      Opcode
Format                                  Mnemonic                                  Instruction
          Primary        Extended
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X       011111      01000 01010 0       add     Add

   X       011111      01000 01010 1       add.    Add & record CR

   X       011111      00000 01010 0      addc     Add Carrying

   X       011111      00000 01010 1      addc.    Add Carrying & record CR

   X       011111      10000 01010 0      addco    Add Carrying & record OV

   X       011111      10000 01010 1      addco.   Add Carrying & record OV & CR

   X       011111      00100 01010 0      adde     Add Extended with CA

   X       011111      00100 01010 1      adde.    Add Extended with CA & record CR

   X       011111      10100 01010 0      addeo    Add Extended with CA & record OV

   X       011111      10100 01010 1      addeo.   Add Extended with CA & record OV & CR

   D       001110      ––––– ––––– –       addi    Add Immediate

   D       001100      ––––– ––––– –      addic    Add Immediate Carrying

   D       001101      ––––– ––––– –      addic.   Add Immediate Carrying & record CR

   D       001111      ––––– ––––– –      addis    Add Immediate Shifted

   X       011111      00111 01010 0      addme    Add to Minus One Extended with CA

   X       011111      00111 01010 1     addme.    Add to Minus One Extended with CA & record CR

   X       011111      10111 01010 0     addmeo    Add to Minus One Extended with CA & record OV

   X       011111      10111 01010 1     addmeo.   Add to Minus One Extended with CA & record OV & CR

   X       011111      11000 01010 0      addo     Add & record OV

   X       011111      11000 01010 1      addo.    Add & record OV & CR

   X       011111      00110 01010 0      addze    Add to Zero Extended with CA

   X       011111      00110 01010 1      addze.   Add to Zero Extended with CA & record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-18                                                                                               Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                   Instruction Model


                              Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                                Mnemonic                                    Instruction
         Primary        Extended
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X      011111      10110 01010 0     addzeo     Add to Zero Extended with CA & record OV

   X      011111      10110 01010 1    addzeo.     Add to Zero Extended with CA & record OV & CR

   X      011111      00000 11100 0      and       AND

   X      011111      00000 11100 1      and.      AND & record CR

   X      011111      00001 11100 0      andc      AND with Complement

   X      011111      00001 11100 1      andc.     AND with Complement & record CR

   D      011100      ––––– ––––– –      andi.     AND Immediate and record CR

   D      011101      ––––– ––––– –     andis.     AND Immediate Shifted and record CR

   I      010010      ––––– ––––0 0        b       Branch

   I      010010      ––––– ––––1 0       ba       Branch Absolute

   B      010000      ––––– ––––0 0       bc       Branch Conditional

   B      010000      ––––– ––––1 0       bca      Branch Conditional Absolute

  XL      010011      10000 10000 0      bcctr     Branch Conditional to Count Register

  XL      010011      10000 10000 1     bcctrl     Branch Conditional to Count Register and Link

   B      010000      ––––– ––––0 1       bcl      Branch Conditional and Link

   B      010000      ––––– ––––1 1      bcla      Branch Conditional and Link Absolute

  XL      010011      00000 10000 0      bclr      Branch Conditional to Link Register

  XL      010011      00000 10000 1      bclrl     Branch Conditional to Link Register and Link

   I      010010      ––––– ––––0 1        bl      Branch and Link

   I      010010      ––––– ––––1 1       bla      Branch and Link Absolute

   X      011111      00000 00000 /      cmp       Compare

   D      001011      ––––– ––––– –      cmpi      Compare Immediate

   X      011111      00001 00000 /      cmpl      Compare Logical

   D      001010      ––––– ––––– –      cmpli     Compare Logical Immediate

   X      011111      00000 11010 0     cntlzw     Count Leading Zeros Word

   X      011111      00000 11010 1     cntlzw.    Count Leading Zeros Word and record CR

  XL      010011      01000 00001 /     crand      Condition Register AND

  XL      010011      00100 00001 /     crandc     Condition Register AND with Complement

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        3-19
Instruction Model


                               Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                                 Mnemonic                                    Instruction
          Primary        Extended
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   XL      010011      01001 00001 /     creqv     Condition Register Equivalent

   XL      010011      00111 00001 /     crnand    Condition Register NAND

   XL      010011      00001 00001 /     crnor     Condition Register NOR

   XL      010011      01110 00001 /      cror     Condition Register OR

   XL      010011      01101 00001 /      crorc    Condition Register OR with Complement

   XL      010011      00110 00001 /      crxor    Condition Register XOR

   X       011111      10111 10110 /      dcba     Data Cache Block Allocate

   X       011111      00010 10110 /      dcbf     Data Cache Block Flush

   X       011111      01110 10110 /      dcbi     Data Cache Block Invalidate

   X       011111      00001 10110 /     dcbst     Data Cache Block Store

   X       011111      01000 10110 /      dcbt     Data Cache Block Touch

   X       011111      00111 10110 /     dcbtst    Data Cache Block Touch for Store

   X       011111      11111 10110 /      dcbz     Data Cache Block set to Zero

   X       011111      01111 01011 0      divw     Divide Word

   X       011111      01111 01011 1      divw.    Divide Word and record CR

   X       011111      11111 01011 0     divwo     Divide Word and record OV

   X       011111      11111 01011 1     divwo.    Divide Word and record OV and CR

   X       011111      01110 01011 0     divwu     Divide Word Unsigned

   X       011111      01110 01011 1     divwu.    Divide Word Unsigned and record CR

   X       011111      11110 01011 0     divwuo    Divide Word Unsigned and record OV

   X       011111      11110 01011 1    divwuo.    Divide Word Unsigned and record OV and CR

   X       011111      01000 11100 0      eqv      Equivalent

   X       011111      01000 11100 1      eqv.     Equivalent and record CR

   X       011111      11101 11010 0     extsb     Extend Sign Byte

   X       011111      11101 11010 1     extsb.    Extend Sign Byte and record CR

   X       011111      11100 11010 0     extsh     Extend Sign Half Word

   X       011111      11100 11010 1     extsh.    Extend Sign Half Word and record CR
   X      111111      01000 01000 0       fabs1    Floating Absolute Value

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-20                                                                                             Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                           Instruction Model


                              Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                                Mnemonic                                     Instruction
         Primary        Extended
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X     111111      01000 01000 1      fabs.1     Floating Absolute Value and record CR
   A     111111      ––––– 10101 0      fadd11     Floating Add
   A     111111      ––––– 10101 1      fadd.1     Floating Add and record CR
   A     111011      ––––– 10101 0      fadds1     Floating Add Single
   A     111011      ––––– 10101 1      fadds.1    Floating Add Single and record CR
   X     111111      11010 01110 /       fcfid1    Floating Convert From Int Doubleword
   X     111111      00001 00000 /      fcmpo1     Floating Compare Ordered
   X     111111      00000 00000 /      fcmpu1     Floating Compare Unordered
   X     111111      11001 01110 /       fctid1    Floating Convert To Int Doubleword
   X     111111      11001 01111 /      fctidz1    Floating Convert To Int Doubleword with round to Zero
   X     111111      00000 01110 0      fctiw1     Floating Convert To Int Word
   X     111111      00000 01110 1      fctiw.1    Floating Convert To Int Word and record CR
   X     111111      00000 01111 0      fctiwz1    Floating Convert To Int Word with round to Zero
   X     111111      00000 01111 1      fctiwz.1   Floating Convert To Int Word with round to Zero and record CR
   A     111111      ––––– 10010 0       fdiv1     Floating Divide
   A     111111      ––––– 10010 1       fdiv.1    Floating Divide and record CR
   A     111011      ––––– 10010 0      fdivs1     Floating Divide Single
   A     111011      ––––– 10010 1      fdivs.1    Floating Divide Single and record CR
   A     111111      ––––– 11101 0      fmadd1     Floating Multiply-Add
   A     111111      ––––– 11101 1     fmadd.1     Floating Multiply-Add and record CR
   A     111011      ––––– 11101 0     fmadds1     Floating Multiply-Add Single
   A     111011      ––––– 11101 1     fmadds.1    Floating Multiply-Add Single and record CR
   X     111111      00010 01000 0       fmr1      Floating Move Register
   X     111111      00010 01000 1       fmr.1     Floating Move Register and record CR
   A     111111      ––––– 11100 0      fmsub1     Floating Multiply-Subtract
   A     111111      ––––– 11100 1     fmsub.1     Floating Multiply-Subtract and record CR
   A     111011      ––––– 11100 0     fmsubs1     Floating Multiply-Subtract Single
   A     111011      ––––– 11100 1     fmsubs.1    Floating Multiply-Subtract Single and record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                3-21
Instruction Model


                               Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                                 Mnemonic                                      Instruction
          Primary        Extended
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   A      111111      ––––– 11001 0       fmul1     Floating Multiply
   A      111111      ––––– 11001 1      fmul.1     Floating Multiply and record CR
   A      111011      ––––– 11001 0      fmuls1     Floating Multiply Single
   A      111011      ––––– 11001 1      fmuls.1    Floating Multiply Single and record CR
   X      111111      00100 01000 0      fnabs1     Floating Negative Absolute Value
   X      111111      00100 01000 1      fnabs.1    Floating Negative Absolute Value and record CR
   X      111111      00001 01000 0       fneg1     Floating Negate
   X      111111      00001 01000 1      fneg.1     Floating Negate and record CR
   A      111111      ––––– 11111 0     fnmadd1     Floating Negative Multiply-Add
   A      111111      ––––– 11111 1     fnmadd.1    Floating Negative Multiply-Add and record CR
   A      111011      ––––– 11111 0    fnmadds1 Floating Negative Multiply-Add Single
   A      111011      ––––– 11111 1    fnmadds.1 Floating Negative Multiply-Add Single and record CR
   A      111111      ––––– 11110 0     fnmsub1     Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract
   A      111111      ––––– 11110 1     fnmsub.1    Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract and record CR
   A      111011      ––––– 11110 0    fnmsubs1 Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract Single
   A      111011      ––––– 11110 1    fnmsubs.1 Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract Single and record CR
   A      111011      ––––– 11000 0       fres1     Floating Reciprocal Estimate Single
   A      111011      ––––– 11000 1       fres.1    Floating Reciprocal Estimate Single and record CR
   X      111111      00000 01100 0       frsp1     Floating Round to Single-Precision
   X      111111      00000 01100 1       frsp.1    Floating Round to Single-Precision and record CR
   A      111111      ––––– 11010 0     frsqrte1    Floating Reciprocal Square Root Estimate
   A      111111      ––––– 11010 1     frsqrte.1   Floating Reciprocal Square Root Estimate and record CR
   A      111111      ––––– 10111 0       fsel1     Floating Select
   A      111111      ––––– 10111 1       fsel.1    Floating Select and record CR
   A      111111      ––––– 10110 0      fsqrt1     Floating Square Root
   A      111111      ––––– 10110 1      fsqrt.1    Floating Square Root and record CR
   A      111011      ––––– 10110 0      fsqrts1    Floating Square Root Single
   A      111011      ––––– 10110 1      fsqrts.1   Floating Square Root Single and record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-22                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                    Instruction Model


                              Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                                Mnemonic                                     Instruction
         Primary        Extended
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   A     111111      ––––– 10100 0       fsub1     Floating Subtract
   A     111111      ––––– 10100 1      fsub.1     Floating Subtract and record CR
   A     111011      ––––– 10100 0      fsubs1     Floating Subtract Single
   A     111011      ––––– 10100 1      fsubs.1    Floating Subtract Single and record CR

   X      011111      11110 10110 /       icbi     Instruction Cache Block Invalidate

   X      011111      00000 10110 /      icbt      Instruction Cache Block Touch

   X      011111      ––––– 01111 /      isel 2    Integer Select

  XL      010011      00100 10110 /      isync     Instruction Synchronize

   D      100010      ––––– ––––– –       lbz      Load Byte and Zero

   D      100011      ––––– ––––– –      lbzu      Load Byte and Zero with Update

   X      011111      00011 10111 /      lbzux     Load Byte and Zero with Update Indexed

   X      011111      00010 10111 /      lbzx      Load Byte and Zero Indexed
   D     110010      ––––– ––––– –       lfd 1     Load Floating-Point Double
   D     110011      ––––– ––––– –       lfdu 1    Load Floating-Point Double with Update
   X     011111      10011 10111 /      lfdux 1    Load Floating-Point Double with Update Indexed
   X     011111      10010 10111 /       lfdx 1    Load Floating-Point Double Indexed
   D     110000      ––––– ––––– –       lfs 1     Load Floating-Point Single
   D     110001      ––––– ––––– –       lfsu 1    Load Floating-Point Single with Update
   X     011111      10001 10111 /      lfsux 1    Load Floating-Point Single with Update Indexed
   X     011111      10000 10111 /       lfsx 1    Load Floating-Point Single Indexed

   D      101010      ––––– ––––– –       lha      Load Half Word Algebraic

   D      101011      ––––– ––––– –      lhau      Load Half Word Algebraic with Update

   X      011111      01011 10111 /      lhaux     Load Half Word Algebraic with Update Indexed

   X      011111      01010 10111 /      lhax      Load Half Word Algebraic Indexed

   X      011111      11000 10110 /      lhbrx     Load Half Word Byte-Reverse Indexed

   D      101000      ––––– ––––– –       lhz      Load Half Word and Zero

   D      101001      ––––– ––––– –      lhzu      Load Half Word and Zero with Update

   X      011111      01001 10111 /      lhzux     Load Half Word and Zero with Update Indexed

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                         3-23
Instruction Model


                               Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                                 Mnemonic                                    Instruction
          Primary        Extended
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X       011111      01000 10111 /      lhzx     Load Half Word and Zero Indexed

   D       101110      ––––– ––––– –      lmw      Load Multiple Word
   X      011111      10010 10101 /       lswi3    Load String Word Immediate
   X      011111      10000 10101 /      lswx3     Load String Word Indexed

   X       011111      00000 10100 /     lwarx4    Load Word and Reserve Indexed

   X       011111      10000 10110 /     lwbrx     Load Word Byte-Reverse Indexed

   D       100000      ––––– ––––– –       lwz     Load Word and Zero

   D       100001      ––––– ––––– –      lwzu     Load Word and Zero with Update

   X       011111      00001 10111 /     lwzux     Load Word and Zero with Update Indexed

   X       011111      00000 10111 /      lwzx     Load Word and Zero Indexed

   X       011111      11010 10110 /     mbar 4    Memory Barrier

   XL      010011      00000 00000 /      mcrf     Move Condition Register Field
   X      111111      00010 00000 /      mcrfs1    Move to Condition Register from FPSCR

   X       011111      10000 00000 /     mcrxr     Move to Condition Register from XER
   X      011111      01000 10011 /     mfapidi3   Move From APID Indirect

   X       011111      00000 10011 /      mfcr     Move From Condition Register
  XFX     011111      01010 00011 /      mfdcr3    Move From Device Control Register
   X      011111      01000 00011 /     mfdcrx3    Move From Device Control Register Indexed
   X      111111      10010 00111 0      mffs1     Move From FPSCR
   X      111111      10010 00111 1      mffs.1    Move From FPSCR and record CR

   X       011111      00010 10011 /     mfmsr     Move From Machine State Register

  XFX      011111      01010 10011 /     mfspr     Move From Special Purpose Register

   X       011111      10010 10110 /    msync 4    Memory Synchronize

  XFX      011111      00100 10000 /      mtcrf    Move To Condition Register Fields
  XFX     011111      01110 00011 /      mtdcr3    Move To Device Control Register
   X      011111      01100 00011 /     mtdcrx3    Move To Device Control Register Indexed
   X      111111      00010 00110 0     mtfsb01    Move To FPSCR Bit 0
   X      111111      00010 00110 1     mtfsb0.1   Move To FPSCR Bit 0 and record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-24                                                                                             Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


                              Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                                Mnemonic                                   Instruction
         Primary        Extended
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X     111111      00001 00110 0     mtfsb11     Move To FPSCR Bit 1
   X     111111      00001 00110 1     mtfsb1.1    Move To FPSCR Bit 1 and record CR
  XFL    111111      10110 00111 0      mtfsf1     Move To FPSCR Fields
  XFL    111111      10110 00111 1      mtfsf.1    Move To FPSCR Fields and record CR
   X     111111      00100 00110 0      mtfsfi1    Move To FPSCR Field Immediate
   X     111111      00100 00110 1      mtfsfi.1   Move To FPSCR Field Immediate and record CR

   X      011111      00100 10010 /     mtmsr      Move To Machine State Register

  XFX     011111      01110 10011 /     mtspr      Move To Special Purpose Register

   X      011111      /0010 01011 0     mulhw      Multiply High Word

   X      011111      /0010 01011 1     mulhw.     Multiply High Word and record CR

   X      011111      /0000 01011 0    mulhwu      Multiply High Word Unsigned

   X      011111      /0000 01011 1    mulhwu.     Multiply High Word Unsigned and record CR

   D      000111      ––––– ––––– –      mulli     Multiply Low Immediate

   X      011111      00111 01011 0     mullw      Multiply Low Word

   X      011111      00111 01011 1     mullw.     Multiply Low Word and record CR

   X      011111      10111 01011 0     mullwo     Multiply Low Word and record OV

   X      011111      10111 01011 1    mullwo.     Multiply Low Word and record OV and CR

   X      011111      01110 11100 0      nand      NAND

   X      011111      01110 11100 1     nand.      NAND and record CR

   X      011111      00011 01000 0      neg       Negate

   X      011111      00011 01000 1      neg.      Negate and record CR

   X      011111      10011 01000 0      nego      Negate and record OV

   X      011111      10011 01000 1     nego.      Negate and record OV and record CR

   X      011111      00011 11100 0       nor      NOR

   X      011111      00011 11100 1      nor.      NOR and record CR

   X      011111      01101 11100 0       or       OR

   X      011111      01101 11100 1       or.      OR and record CR

   X      011111      01100 11100 0       orc      OR with Complement

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      3-25
Instruction Model


                                  Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                                         Mnemonic                                    Instruction
          Primary         Extended
          (Inst0:5)       (Inst21:31)

   X       011111      01100 11100 1             orc.     OR with Complement and record CR

   D       011000      ––––– ––––– –              ori     OR Immediate

   D       011001      ––––– ––––– –             oris     OR Immediate Shifted

   XL      010011      00001 10011 /             rfci     Return From Critical Interrupt

   XL      010011      00001 00111 /             rfdi5    Return From Debug Interrupt

   XL      010011      00001 10010 /              rfi     Return From Interrupt

   M       010100      ––––– ––––– 0            rlwimi    Rotate Left Word Immed then Mask Insert

   M       010100      ––––– ––––– 1            rlwimi.   Rotate Left Word Immed then Mask Insert and record CR

   M       010101      ––––– ––––– 0            rlwinm    Rotate Left Word Immed then AND with Mask

   M       010101      ––––– ––––– 1            rlwinm.   Rotate Left Word Immed then AND with Mask and record CR

   M       010111      ––––– ––––– 0            rlwnm     Rotate Left Word then AND with Mask

   M       010111      ––––– ––––– 1            rlwnm.    Rotate Left Word then AND with Mask and record CR

   SC      010001       / / / / / / / / /1 /      sc      System Call

   X       011111      00000 11000 0             slw      Shift Left Word

   X       011111      00000 11000 1             slw.     Shift Left Word and record CR

   X       011111      11000 11000 0             sraw     Shift Right Algebraic Word

   X       011111      11000 11000 1             sraw.    Shift Right Algebraic Word and record CR

   X       011111      11001 11000 0            srawi     Shift Right Algebraic Word Immediate

   X       011111      11001 11000 1            srawi.    Shift Right Algebraic Word Immediate and record CR

   X       011111      10000 11000 0             srw      Shift Right Word

   X       011111      10000 11000 1             srw.     Shift Right Word and record CR

   D       100110      ––––– ––––– –              stb     Store Byte

   D       100111      ––––– ––––– –             stbu     Store Byte with Update

   X       011111      00111 10111 /            stbux     Store Byte with Update Indexed

   X       011111      00110 10111 /             stbx     Store Byte Indexed
   D      110110      ––––– ––––– –              stfd1    Store Floating-Point Double
   D      110111      ––––– ––––– –             stfdu1    Store Floating-Point Double with Update
   X      011111      10111 10111 /             stfdux1   Store Floating-Point Double with Update Indexed

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                       e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-26                                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                     Instruction Model


                              Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                                Mnemonic                                    Instruction
         Primary        Extended
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X     011111      10110 10111 /      stfdx1     Store Floating-Point Double Indexed
   X     011111      11110 10111 /      stfiwx1    Store Floating-Point as Int Word Indexed
   D     110100      ––––– ––––– –       stfs1     Store Floating-Point Single
   D     110101      ––––– ––––– –      stfsu1     Store Floating-Point Single with Update
   X     011111      10101 10111 /      stfsux1    Store Floating-Point Single with Update Indexed
   X     011111      10100 10111 /      stfsx1     Store Floating-Point Single Indexed

   D      101100      ––––– ––––– –       sth      Store Half Word

   X      011111      11100 10110 /     sthbrx     Store Half Word Byte-Reverse Indexed

   D      101101      ––––– ––––– –      sthu      Store Half Word with Update

   X      011111      01101 10111 /     sthux      Store Half Word with Update Indexed

   X      011111      01100 10111 /      sthx      Store Half Word Indexed

   D      101111      ––––– ––––– –      stmw      Store Multiple Word
   X     011111      10110 10101 /      stswi3     Store String Word Immediate
   X     011111      10100 10101 /      stswx3     Store String Word Indexed

   D      100100      ––––– ––––– –       stw      Store Word

   X      011111      10100 10110 /     stwbrx     Store Word Byte-Reverse Indexed

   X      011111      00100 10110 1    stwcx. 4    Store Word Conditional Indexed and record CR

   D      100101      ––––– ––––– –      stwu      Store Word with Update

   X      011111      00101 10111 /     stwux      Store Word with Update Indexed

   X      011111      00100 10111 /      stwx      Store Word Indexed

   X      011111      00001 01000 0      subf      Subtract From

   X      011111      00001 01000 1      subf.     Subtract From and record CR

   X      011111      00000 01000 0     subfc      Subtract From Carrying

   X      011111      00000 01000 1     subfc.     Subtract From Carrying and record CR

   X      011111      10000 01000 0     subfco     Subtract From Carrying and record OV

   X      011111      10000 01000 1    subfco.     Subtract From Carrying and record OV and CR

   X      011111      00100 01000 0     subfe      Subtract From Extended with CA

   X      011111      00100 01000 1     subfe.     Subtract From Extended with CA and record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                          3-27
Instruction Model


                               Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                                 Mnemonic                                  Instruction
          Primary        Extended
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X       011111      10100 01000 0     subfeo    Subtract From Extended with CA and record OV

   X       011111      10100 01000 1    subfeo.    Subtract From Extended with CA and record OV and CR

   D       001000      ––––– ––––– –     subfic    Subtract From Immediate Carrying

   X       011111      00111 01000 0    subfme     Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA

   X       011111      00111 01000 1    subfme.    Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record CR

   X       011111      10111 01000 0    subfmeo    Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record OV

   X       011111      10111 01000 1    subfmeo. Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record OV and CR

   X       011111      10001 01000 0     subfo     Subtract From and record OV

   X       011111      10001 01000 1     subfo.    Subtract From and record OV and CR

   X       011111      00110 01000 0     subfze    Subtract From Zero Extended with CA

   X       011111      00110 01000 1     subfze.   Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record CR

   X       011111      10110 01000 0    subfzeo    Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record OV

   X       011111      10110 01000 1    subfzeo.   Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record OV and CR

   X       011111      11000 10010 /     tlbivax   TLB Invalidate Virtual Address Indexed

   X       011111      11101 10010 /      tlbre    TLB Read Entry

   X       011111      11100 10010 /      tlbsx    TLB Search Indexed

   X       011111      10001 10110 /     tlbsync   TLB Synchronize

   X       011111      11110 10010 /     tlbwe     TLB Write Entry

   X       011111      00000 00100 /       tw      Trap Word

   D       000011      ––––– ––––– –       twi     Trap Word Immediate

   X       011111      00100 00011 /     wrtee     Write External Enable

   X       011111      00101 00011 /     wrteei    Write External Enable Immediate

   X       011111      01001 11100 0      xor      XOR

   X       011111      01001 11100 1      xor.     XOR and record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.




                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-28                                                                                              Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                       Instruction Model


                              Table 3-11. Instructions Sorted by Mnemonic (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                                Mnemonic                                  Instruction
         Primary        Extended
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

    D     011010      ––––– ––––– –      xori      XOR Immediate

    D     011011      ––––– ––––– –      xoris     XOR Immediate Shifted

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use.
1
  Attempted execution causes an unimplemented exception if MSR[FP]=1, or an FP Unavailable exception if MSR[FP]=0.
2
  EIS-defined isel instruction, refer to Section 3.10.1, “Integer Select APU.”
3 The core CPU will take an illegal instruction exception for unsupported DCR values.
4 See Section 3.7, “Memory Synchronization and Reservation Instructions.”
5 See Section 3.10.2, “Debug APU.”




3.13.2       Instruction Index Sorted by Opcode
Table 3-12 lists instructions by opcode.
                                      Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode

                     Opcode
Format                  Extended      Mnemonic                                  Instruction
         Primary
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

    D    000011       ––––– ––––– –      twi      Trap Word Immediate
    D    000111       ––––– ––––– –     mulli     Multiply Low Immediate
    D    001000       ––––– ––––– –     subfic    Subtract From Immediate Carrying
    D    001010       ––––– ––––– –     cmpli     Compare Logical Immediate
    D    001011       ––––– ––––– –     cmpi      Compare Immediate
    D    001100       ––––– ––––– –     addic     Add Immediate Carrying
    D    001101       ––––– ––––– –     addic.    Add Immediate Carrying and record CR
    D    001110       ––––– ––––– –      addi     Add Immediate
    D    001111       ––––– ––––– –     addis     Add Immediate Shifted
    B    010000       ––––– ––––0 0       bc      Branch Conditional
    B    010000       ––––– ––––0 1      bcl      Branch Conditional and Link
    B    010000       ––––– ––––1 0      bca      Branch Conditional Absolute

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                              3-29
Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                   Extended      Mnemonic                                    Instruction
          Primary
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

    B     010000       ––––– ––––1 1      bcla    Branch Conditional and Link Absolute
   SC     010001       ///// ////1/        sc     System Call
    I     010010       ––––– ––––0 0       b      Branch
    I     010010       ––––– ––––0 1       bl     Branch and Link
    I     010010       ––––– ––––1 0       ba     Branch Absolute
    I     010010       ––––– ––––1 1      bla     Branch and Link Absolute
   XL     010011       00000 00000 /     mcrf     Move Condition Register Field
   XL     010011       00000 10000 0      bclr    Branch Conditional to Link Register
   XL     010011       00000 10000 1      bclrl   Branch Conditional to Link Register and Link
   XL     010011       00001 00001 /     crnor    Condition Register NOR
   XL     010011       00001 00111 /      rfdi    Return From Debug Interrupt
   XL     010011       00001 10010 /       rfi    Return From Interrupt
   XL     010011       00001 10011 /      rfci    Return From Critical Interrupt
   XL     010011       00100 00001 /    crandc    Condition Register AND with Complement
   XL     010011       00100 10110 /     isync    Instruction Synchronize
   XL     010011       00110 00001 /     crxor    Condition Register XOR
   XL     010011       00111 00001 /    crnand    Condition Register NAND
   XL     010011       01000 00001 /     crand    Condition Register AND
   XL     010011       01001 00001 /     creqv    Condition Register Equivalent
   XL     010011       01101 00001 /     crorc    Condition Register OR with Complement
   XL     010011       01110 00001 /      cror    Condition Register OR
   XL     010011       10000 10000 0     bcctr    Branch Conditional to Count Register
   XL     010011       10000 10000 1     bcctrl   Branch Conditional to Count Register and Link
   M      010100       ––––– ––––– 0     rlwimi   Rotate Left Word Immed then Mask Insert
   M      010100       ––––– ––––– 1    rlwimi.   Rotate Left Word Immed then Mask Insert and record CR
   M      010101       ––––– ––––– 0    rlwinm    Rotate Left Word Immed then AND with Mask
   M      010101       ––––– ––––– 1    rlwinm.   Rotate Left Word Immed then AND with Mask and record CR
   M      010111       ––––– ––––– 0     rlwnm    Rotate Left Word then AND with Mask

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-30                                                                                              Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                     Instruction Model


                                Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                  Extended      Mnemonic                                   Instruction
         Primary
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   M     010111       ––––– ––––– 1    rlwnm.    Rotate Left Word then AND with Mask and record CR
   D     011000       ––––– ––––– –      ori     OR Immediate
   D     011001       ––––– ––––– –      oris    OR Immediate Shifted
   D     011010       ––––– ––––– –      xori    XOR Immediate
   D     011011       ––––– ––––– –     xoris    XOR Immediate Shifted
   D     011100       ––––– ––––– –     andi.    AND Immediate and record CR
   D     011101       ––––– ––––– –     andis.   AND Immediate Shifted and record CR
   ??    011111       ––––– 01111 /      isel    Integer Select
   X     011111       00000 00000 /      cmp     Compare
   X     011111       00000 00100 /       tw     Trap Word
   X     011111       00000 01000 0     subfc    Subtract From Carrying
   X     011111       00000 01000 1     subfc.   Subtract From Carrying and record CR
   X     011111       00000 01010 0     addc     Add Carrying
   X     011111       00000 01010 1     addc.    Add Carrying and record CR
   X     011111       /0000 01011 0    mulhwu    Multiply High Word Unsigned
   X     011111       /0000 01011 1    mulhwu.   Multiply High Word Unsigned and record CR
   X     011111       00000 10011 /     mfcr     Move From Condition Register
   X     011111       00000 10100 /     lwarx    Load Word and Reserve Indexed
   X     011111       00000 10110 /      icbt    Instruction Cache Block Touch
   X     011111       00000 10111 /      lwzx    Load Word and Zero Indexed
   X     011111       00000 11000 0      slw     Shift Left Word
   X     011111       00000 11000 1      slw.    Shift Left Word and record CR
   X     011111       00000 11010 0     cntlzw   Count Leading Zeros Word
   X     011111       00000 11010 1    cntlzw.   Count Leading Zeros Word and record CR
   X     011111       00000 11100 0      and     AND
   X     011111       00000 11100 1      and.    AND and record CR
   X     011111       00001 00000 /     cmpl     Compare Logical
   X     011111       00001 01000 0     subf     Subtract From

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                          3-31
Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                   Extended      Mnemonic                                 Instruction
          Primary
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

    X     011111       00001 01000 1     subf.    Subtract From and record CR
    X     011111       00001 10110 /     dcbst    Data Cache Block Store
    X     011111       00001 10111 /     lwzux    Load Word and Zero with Update Indexed
    X     011111       00001 11100 0     andc     AND with Complement
    X     011111       00001 11100 1     andc.    AND with Complement and record CR
    X     011111       /0010 01011 0    mulhw     Multiply High Word
    X     011111       /0010 01011 1    mulhw.    Multiply High Word and record CR
    X     011111       00010 10011 /     mfmsr    Move From Machine State Register
    X     011111       00010 10110 /     dcbf     Data Cache Block Flush
    X     011111       00010 10111 /      lbzx    Load Byte and Zero Indexed
    X     011111       00011 01000 0      neg     Negate
    X     011111       00011 01000 1      neg.    Negate and record CR
    X     011111       00011 10111 /     lbzux    Load Byte and Zero with Update Indexed
    X     011111       00011 11100 0      nor     NOR
    X     011111       00011 11100 1      nor.    NOR and record CR
    X     011111       00100 00011 /     wrtee    Write External Enable
    X     011111       00100 01000 0     subfe    Subtract From Extended with CA
    X     011111       00100 01000 1     subfe.   Subtract From Extended with CA and record CR
    X     011111       00100 01010 0     adde     Add Extended with CA
    X     011111       00100 01010 1     adde.    Add Extended with CA and record CR
  XFX     011111       00100 10000 /     mtcrf    Move To Condition Register Fields
    X     011111       00100 10010 /     mtmsr    Move To Machine State Register
    X     011111       00100 10110 1     stwcx.   Store Word Conditional Indexed and record CR
    X     011111       00100 10111 /     stwx     Store Word Indexed
    X     011111       00101 00011 /     wrteei   Write External Enable Immediate
    X     011111       00101 10111 /     stwux    Store Word with Update Indexed
    X     011111       00110 01000 0    subfze    Subtract From Zero Extended with CA
    X     011111       00110 01000 1    subfze.   Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-32                                                                                             Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                      Instruction Model


                                Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                  Extended      Mnemonic                                  Instruction
         Primary
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X     011111       00110 01010 0     addze    Add to Zero Extended with CA
   X     011111       00110 01010 1    addze.    Add to Zero Extended with CA and record CR
   X     011111       00110 10111 /      stbx    Store Byte Indexed
   X     011111       00111 01000 0    subfme    Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA
   X     011111       00111 01000 1    subfme.   Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record CR
   X     011111       00111 01010 0    addme     Add to Minus One Extended with CA
   X     011111       00111 01010 1    addme.    Add to Minus One Extended with CA and record CR
   X     011111       00111 01011 0     mullw    Multiply Low Word
   X     011111       00111 01011 1     mullw.   Multiply Low Word and record CR
   X     011111       00111 10110 /     dcbtst   Data Cache Block Touch for Store
   X     011111       00111 10111 /     stbux    Store Byte with Update Indexed
   X     011111       01000 00011 /    mfdcrx    Move From Device Control Register Indexed
   X     011111       01000 01010 0      add     Add
   X     011111       01000 01010 1      add.    Add and record CR
   X     011111       01000 10011 /    mfapidi   Move From APID Indirect
   X     011111       01000 10110 /     dcbt     Data Cache Block Touch
   X     011111       01000 10111 /      lhzx    Load Halfword and Zero Indexed
   X     011111       01000 11100 0      eqv     Equivalent
   X     011111       01000 11100 1      eqv.    Equivalent and record CR
   X     011111       01001 10111 /     lhzux    Load Halfword and Zero with Update Indexed
   X     011111       01001 11100 0      xor     XOR
   X     011111       01001 11100 1      xor.    XOR and record CR
  XFX    011111       01010 00011 /     mfdcr    Move From Device Control Register
  XFX    011111       01010 10011 /     mfspr    Move From Special Purpose Register
   X     011111       01010 10111 /      lhax    Load Halfword Algebraic Indexed
   X     011111       01011 10111 /     lhaux    Load Halfword Algebraic with Update Indexed
   X     011111       01100 00011 /    mtdcrx    Move To Device Control Register Indexed
   X     011111       01100 10111 /      sthx    Store Halfword Indexed

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                           3-33
Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                   Extended      Mnemonic                                 Instruction
          Primary
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

    X     011111       01100 11100 0      orc     OR with Complement
    X     011111       01100 11100 1      orc.    OR with Complement and record CR
    X     011111       01101 10111 /     sthux    Store Halfword with Update Indexed
    X     011111       01101 11100 0       or     OR
    X     011111       01101 11100 1      or.     OR and record CR
  XFX     011111       01110 00011 /     mtdcr    Move To Device Control Register
    X     011111       01110 01011 0     divwu    Divide Word Unsigned
    X     011111       01110 01011 1     divwu.   Divide Word Unsigned and record CR
  XFX     011111       01110 10011 /     mtspr    Move To Special Purpose Register
    X     011111       01110 10110 /      dcbi    Data Cache Block Invalidate
    X     011111       01110 11100 0     nand     NAND
    X     011111       01110 11100 1     nand.    NAND and record CR
    X     011111       01111 01011 0     divw     Divide Word
    X     011111       01111 01011 1     divw.    Divide Word and record CR
    X     011111       10000 00000 /     mcrxr    Move to Condition Register from XER
    X     011111       10000 01000 0    subfco    Subtract From Carrying and record OV
    X     011111       10000 01000 1    subfco.   Subtract From Carrying and record OV and CR
    X     011111       10000 01010 0     addco    Add Carrying and record OV
    X     011111       10000 01010 1    addco.    Add Carrying and record OV and CR
    X     011111       10000 10101 /     lswx     Load String Word Indexed
    X     011111       10000 10110 /     lwbrx    Load Word Byte-Reverse Indexed
    X     011111       10000 10111 /      lfsx    Load Floating-Point Single Indexed
    X     011111       10000 11000 0      srw     Shift Right Word
    X     011111       10000 11000 1      srw.    Shift Right Word and record CR
    X     011111       10001 01000 0     subfo    Subtract From and record OV
    X     011111       10001 01000 1     subfo.   Subtract From and record OV and CR
    X     011111       10001 10110 /    tlbsync   TLB Synchronize
    X     011111       10001 10111 /     lfsux    Load Floating-Point Single with Update Indexed

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-34                                                                                               Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                        Instruction Model


                                Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                  Extended      Mnemonic                                   Instruction
         Primary
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   X     011111       10010 10101 /      lswi     Load String Word Immediate
   X     011111       10010 10110 /    msync      Memory Synchronize
   X     011111       10010 10111 /      lfdx     Load Floating-Point Double Indexed
   X     011111       10011 01000 0     nego      Negate and record OV
   X     011111       10011 01000 1     nego.     Negate and record OV and record CR
   X     011111       10011 10111 /     lfdux     Load Floating-Point Double with Update Indexed
   X     011111       10100 01000 0    subfeo     Subtract From Extended with CA and record OV
   X     011111       10100 01000 1    subfeo.    Subtract From Extended with CA and record OV and CR
   X     011111       10100 01010 0     addeo     Add Extended with CA and record OV
   X     011111       10100 01010 1    addeo.     Add Extended with CA and record OV and CR
   X     011111       10100 10101 /     stswx     Store String Word Indexed
   X     011111       10100 10110 /    stwbrx     Store Word Byte-Reverse Indexed
   X     011111       10100 10111 /     stfsx     Store Floating-Point Single Indexed
   X     011111       10101 10111 /     stfsux    Store Floating-Point Single with Update Indexed
   X     011111       10110 01000 0    subfzeo    Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record OV
   X     011111       10110 01000 1    subfzeo.   Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record OV and CR
   X     011111       10110 01010 0    addzeo     Add to Zero Extended with CA and record OV
   X     011111       10110 01010 1    addzeo.    Add to Zero Extended with CA and record OV and CR
   X     011111       10110 10101 /     stswi     Store String Word Immediate
   X     011111       10110 10111 /     stfdx     Store Floating-Point Double Indexed
   X     011111       10111 01000 0   subfmeo     Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record OV
   X     011111       10111 01000 1   subfmeo. Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record OV and CR
   X     011111       10111 01010 0    addmeo     Add to Minus One Extended with CA and record OV
   X     011111       10111 01010 1    addmeo.    Add to Minus One Extended with CA and record OV and CR
   X     011111       10111 01011 0    mullwo     Multiply Low Word and record OV
   X     011111       10111 01011 1    mullwo.    Multiply Low Word and record OV and CR
   X     011111       10111 10110 /     dcba      Data Cache Block Allocate
   X     011111       10111 10111 /     stfdux    Store Floating-Point Double with Update Indexed

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                             3-35
Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                   Extended      Mnemonic                                  Instruction
          Primary
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

    X     011111       11000 01010 0     addo     Add and record OV
    X     011111       11000 01010 1     addo.    Add and record OV and CR
    X     011111       11000 10010 /    tlbivax   TLB Invalidate Virtual Address Indexed
    X     011111       11000 10110 /     lhbrx    Load Halfword Byte-Reverse Indexed
    X     011111       11000 11000 0     sraw     Shift Right Algebraic Word
    X     011111       11000 11000 1     sraw.    Shift Right Algebraic Word and record CR
    X     011111       11001 11000 0     srawi    Shift Right Algebraic Word Immediate
    X     011111       11001 11000 1     srawi.   Shift Right Algebraic Word Immediate and record CR
    X     011111       11010 10110 /     mbar     Memory Barrier
    X     011111       11100 10010 ?     tlbsx    TLB Search Indexed
    X     011111       11100 10110 /     sthbrx   Store Halfword Byte-Reverse Indexed
    X     011111       11100 11010 0     extsh    Extend Sign Halfword
    X     011111       11100 11010 1     extsh.   Extend Sign Halfword and record CR
    X     011111       11101 10010 /     tlbre    TLB Read Entry
    X     011111       11101 11010 0     extsb    Extend Sign Byte
    X     011111       11101 11010 1     extsb.   Extend Sign Byte and record CR
    X     011111       11110 01011 0    divwuo    Divide Word Unsigned and record OV
    X     011111       11110 01011 1    divwuo.   Divide Word Unsigned and record OV and CR
    X     011111       11110 10010 /     tlbwe    TLB Write Entry
    X     011111       11110 10110 /      icbi    Instruction Cache Block Invalidate
    X     011111       11110 10111 /     stfiwx   Store Floating-Point as Int Word Indexed
    X     011111       11111 01011 0     divwo    Divide Word and record OV
    X     011111       11111 01011 1     divwo.   Divide Word and record OV and CR
    X     011111       11111 10110 /     dcbz     Data Cache Block set to Zero
    D     100000       ––––– ––––– –      lwz     Load Word and Zero
    D     100001       ––––– ––––– –     lwzu     Load Word and Zero with Update
    D     100010       ––––– ––––– –      lbz     Load Byte and Zero
    D     100011       ––––– ––––– –      lbzu    Load Byte and Zero with Update

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-36                                                                                             Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                               Instruction Model


                                Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                  Extended      Mnemonic                                   Instruction
         Primary
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   D     100100       ––––– ––––– –      stw      Store Word
   D     100101       ––––– ––––– –     stwu      Store Word with Update
   D     100110       ––––– ––––– –      stb      Store Byte
   D     100111       ––––– ––––– –      stbu     Store Byte with Update
   D     101000       ––––– ––––– –      lhz      Load Halfword and Zero
   D     101001       ––––– ––––– –      lhzu     Load Halfword and Zero with Update
   D     101010       ––––– ––––– –      lha      Load Halfword Algebraic
   D     101011       ––––– ––––– –      lhau     Load Halfword Algebraic with Update
   D     101100       ––––– ––––– –      sth      Store Halfword
   D     101101       ––––– ––––– –      sthu     Store Halfword with Update
   D     101110       ––––– ––––– –      lmw      Load Multiple Word
   D     101111       ––––– ––––– –     stmw      Store Multiple Word
   D     110000       ––––– ––––– –       lfs     Load Floating-Point Single
   D     110001       ––––– ––––– –      lfsu     Load Floating-Point Single with Update
   D     110010       ––––– ––––– –       lfd     Load Floating-Point Double
   D     110011       ––––– ––––– –      lfdu     Load Floating-Point Double with Update
   D     110100       ––––– ––––– –      stfs     Store Floating-Point Single
   D     110101       ––––– ––––– –     stfsu     Store Floating-Point Single with Update
   D     110110       ––––– ––––– –      stfd     Store Floating-Point Double
   D     110111       ––––– ––––– –     stfdu     Store Floating-Point Double with Update
   A     111011       ––––– 10010 0     fdivs     Floating Divide Single
   A     111011       ––––– 10010 1     fdivs.    Floating Divide Single and record CR
   A     111011       ––––– 10100 0     fsubs     Floating Subtract Single
   A     111011       ––––– 10100 1     fsubs.    Floating Subtract Single and record CR
   A     111011       ––––– 10101 0     fadds     Floating Add Single
   A     111011       ––––– 10101 1     fadds.    Floating Add Single and record CR
   A     111011       ––––– 10110 0     fsqrts    Floating Square Root Single
   A     111011       ––––– 10110 1     fsqrts.   Floating Square Root Single and record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                    3-37
Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                      Opcode
Format                   Extended      Mnemonic                                    Instruction
          Primary
          (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

    A     111011       ––––– 11000 0      fres     Floating Reciprocal Estimate Single
    A     111011       ––––– 11000 1     fres.     Floating Reciprocal Estimate Single and record CR
    A     111011       ––––– 11001 0     fmuls     Floating Multiply Single
    A     111011       ––––– 11001 1     fmuls.    Floating Multiply Single and record CR
    A     111011       ––––– 11100 0    fmsubs     Floating Multiply-Subtract Single
    A     111011       ––––– 11100 1    fmsubs.    Floating Multiply-Subtract Single and record CR
    A     111011       ––––– 11101 0    fmadds     Floating Multiply-Add Single
    A     111011       ––––– 11101 1    fmadds.    Floating Multiply-Add Single and record CR
    A     111011       ––––– 11110 0   fnmsubs     Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract Single
    A     111011       ––––– 11110 1   fnmsubs. Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract Single and record CR
    A     111011       ––––– 11111 0   fnmadds     Floating Negative Multiply-Add Single
    A     111011       ––––– 11111 1   fnmadds. Floating Negative Multiply-Add Single and record CR
    A     111111       ––––– 10010 0      fdiv     Floating Divide
    A     111111       ––––– 10010 1      fdiv.    Floating Divide and record CR
    A     111111       ––––– 10100 0     fsub      Floating Subtract
    A     111111       ––––– 10100 1     fsub.     Floating Subtract and record CR
    A     111111       ––––– 10101 0     fadd      Floating Add
    A     111111       ––––– 10101 1     fadd.     Floating Add and record CR
    A     111111       ––––– 10110 0     fsqrt     Floating Square Root
    A     111111       ––––– 10110 1     fsqrt.    Floating Square Root and record CR
    A     111111       ––––– 10111 0      fsel     Floating Select
    A     111111       ––––– 10111 1      fsel.    Floating Select and record CR
    A     111111       ––––– 11001 0      fmul     Floating Multiply
    A     111111       ––––– 11001 1     fmul.     Floating Multiply and record CR
    A     111111       ––––– 11010 0    frsqrte    Floating Reciprocal Square Root Estimate
    A     111111       ––––– 11010 1    frsqrte.   Floating Reciprocal Square Root Estimate and record CR
    A     111111       ––––– 11100 0     fmsub     Floating Multiply-Subtract
    A     111111       ––––– 11100 1    fmsub.     Floating Multiply-Subtract and record CR

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-38                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                           Instruction Model


                                Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                     Opcode
Format                  Extended      Mnemonic                                     Instruction
         Primary
         (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

   A     111111       ––––– 11101 0     fmadd     Floating Multiply-Add
   A     111111       ––––– 11101 1    fmadd.     Floating Multiply-Add and record CR
   A     111111       ––––– 11110 0    fnmsub     Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract
   A     111111       ––––– 11110 1    fnmsub.    Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract and record CR
   A     111111       ––––– 11111 0    fnmadd     Floating Negative Multiply-Add
   A     111111       ––––– 11111 1    fnmadd.    Floating Negative Multiply-Add and record CR
   X     111111       00000 00000 /     fcmpu     Floating Compare Unordered
   X     111111       00000 01100 0      frsp     Floating Round to Single-Precision
   X     111111       00000 01100 1     frsp.     Floating Round to Single-Precision and record CR
   X     111111       00000 01110 0     fctiw     Floating Convert To Int Word
   X     111111       00000 01110 1     fctiw.    Floating Convert To Int Word and record CR
   X     111111       00000 01111 0     fctiwz    Floating Convert To Int Word with round to Zero
   X     111111       00000 01111 1     fctiwz.   Floating Convert To Int Word with round to Zero and record CR
   X     111111       00001 00000 /     fcmpo     Floating Compare Ordered
   X     111111       00001 00110 0    mtfsb1     Move To FPSCR Bit 1
   X     111111       00001 00110 1    mtfsb1.    Move To FPSCR Bit 1 and record CR
   X     111111       00001 01000 0      fneg     Floating Negate
   X     111111       00001 01000 1     fneg.     Floating Negate and record CR
   X     111111       00010 00000 /     mcrfs     Move to Condition Register from FPSCR
   X     111111       00010 00110 0    mtfsb0     Move To FPSCR Bit 0
   X     111111       00010 00110 1    mtfsb0.    Move To FPSCR Bit 0 and record CR
   X     111111       00010 01000 0      fmr      Floating Move Register
   X     111111       00010 01000 1      fmr.     Floating Move Register and record CR
   X     111111       00100 00110 0     mtfsfi    Move To FPSCR Field Immediate
   X     111111       00100 00110 1     mtfsfi.   Move To FPSCR Field Immediate and record CR
   X     111111       00100 01000 0     fnabs     Floating Negative Absolute Value
   X     111111       00100 01000 1     fnabs.    Floating Negative Absolute Value and record CR
   X     111111       01000 01000 0      fabs     Floating Absolute Value

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                3-39
Instruction Model


                                  Table 3-12. Instructions Sorted by Opcode (continued)

                       Opcode
Format                    Extended      Mnemonic                                  Instruction
           Primary
           (Inst0:5)      (Inst21:31)

    X      111111       01000 01000 1     fabs.     Floating Absolute Value and record CR
    X      111111       10010 00111 0      mffs     Move From FPSCR
    X      111111       10010 00111 1     mffs.     Move From FPSCR and record CR
  XFL      111111       10110 00111 0     mtfsf     Move To FPSCR Fields
  XFL      111111       10110 00111 1     mtfsf.    Move To FPSCR Fields and record CR
    X      111111       11001 01110 /      fctid    Floating Convert To Int Doubleword
    X      111111       11001 01111 /     fctidz    Floating Convert To Int Doubleword with round to Zero
    X      111111       11010 01110 /      fcfid    Floating Convert From Int Doubleword

Legend:
- Don’t care, usually part of an operand field
/ Reserved bit, invalid instruction form if encoded as 1
? Allocated for implementation-dependent use. See User’ Manual for the implementation


Table 3-13 lists all supported instructions, including VLE instructions.
                                             Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing

   Mnemonic                                         Instruction Name                                          Source

        add         Add                                                                                       Book E

        add.        Add & record CR                                                                           Book E

        addc        Add Carrying                                                                              Book E

        addc.       Add Carrying & record CR                                                                  Book E

       addco        Add Carrying & record OV                                                                  Book E

       addco.       Add Carrying & record OV & CR                                                             Book E

        adde        Add Extended with CA                                                                      Book E

        adde.       Add Extended with CA & record CR                                                          Book E

       addeo        Add Extended with CA & record OV                                                          Book E

       addeo.       Add Extended with CA & record OV & CR                                                     Book E

        addi        Add Immediate                                                                             Book E

        addic       Add Immediate Carrying                                                                    Book E

       addic.       Add Immediate Carrying & record CR                                                        Book E

        addis       Add Immediate Shifted                                                                     Book E

       addme        Add to Minus One Extended with CA                                                         Book E

       addme.       Add to Minus One Extended with CA & record CR                                             Book E



                                   e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-40                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Instruction Model


                                  Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                      Instruction Name                        Source

   addmeo       Add to Minus One Extended with CA & record OV                            Book E

   addmeo.      Add to Minus One Extended with CA & record OV & CR                       Book E

     addo       Add & record OV                                                          Book E

     addo.      Add & record OV & CR                                                     Book E

     addze      Add to Zero Extended with CA                                             Book E

    addze.      Add to Zero Extended with CA & record CR                                 Book E

    addzeo      Add to Zero Extended with CA & record OV                                 Book E

    addzeo.     Add to Zero Extended with CA & record OV & CR                            Book E

      and       AND                                                                      Book E

     and.       AND & record CR                                                          Book E

     andc       AND with Complement                                                      Book E

     andc.      AND with Complement & record CR                                          Book E

     andi.      AND Immediate and record CR                                              Book E

    andis.      AND Immediate Shifted and record CR                                      Book E

       b        Branch                                                                   Book E

      ba        Branch Absolute                                                          Book E

      bc        Branch Conditional                                                       Book E

      bca       Branch Conditional Absolute                                              Book E

     bcctr      Branch Conditional to Count Register                                     Book E

     bcctrl     Branch Conditional to Count Register and Link                            Book E

      bcl       Branch Conditional and Link                                              Book E

     bcla       Branch Conditional and Link Absolute                                     Book E

      bclr      Branch Conditional to Link Register                                      Book E

     bclrl      Branch Conditional to Link Register and Link                             Book E

       bl       Branch and Link                                                          Book E

      bla       Branch and Link Absolute                                                 Book E

     brinc      Bit Reversed Increment1                                                   SPE

     cmp        Compare                                                                  Book E

     cmpi       Compare Immediate                                                        Book E

     cmpl       Compare Logical                                                          Book E

     cmpli      Compare Logical Immediate                                                Book E

    cntlzw      Count Leading Zeros Word                                                 Book E

    cntlzw.     Count Leading Zeros Word and record CR                                   Book E


                             e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                            3-41
Instruction Model


                                     Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                         Instruction Name                                 Source

        crand       Condition Register AND                                                           Book E

       crandc       Condition Register AND with Complement                                           Book E

        creqv       Condition Register Equivalent                                                    Book E

       crnand       Condition Register NAND                                                          Book E

        crnor       Condition Register NOR                                                           Book E

        cror        Condition Register OR                                                            Book E

        crorc       Condition Register OR with Complement                                            Book E

        crxor       Condition Register XOR                                                           Book E

       dcba 2       Data Cache Block Allocate                                                        Book E

       dcbf 2       Data Cache Block Flush                                                           Book E

        dcbi 2      Data Cache Block Invalidate                                                      Book E

       dcblc2       Data Cache Block Lock Clear                                                   Cache locking

       dcbst 2      Data Cache Block Store                                                           Book E

       dcbt 2       Data Cache Block Touch                                                           Book E

       dcbtls 2     Data Cache Block Touch and Lock Set                                           Cache locking

       dcbtst 2     Data Cache Block Touch for Store                                                 Book E

   dcbtstls 2       Data Cache Block Touch for Store and Lock Set                                 Cache locking

       dcbz 2       Data Cache Block set to Zero                                                     Book E

        divw        Divide Word                                                                      Book E

        divw.       Divide Word and record CR                                                        Book E

       divwo        Divide Word and record OV                                                        Book E

       divwo.       Divide Word and record OV and CR                                                 Book E

       divwu        Divide Word Unsigned                                                             Book E

       divwu.       Divide Word Unsigned and record CR                                               Book E

       divwuo       Divide Word Unsigned and record OV                                               Book E

       divwuo.      Divide Word Unsigned and record OV and CR                                        Book E

       efsabs       Floating-Point Absolute Value                                                  Scalar SPFP

       efsadd       Floating-Point Add                                                             Scalar SPFP

       efscfsf      Convert Floating-Point from Signed Fraction                                    Scalar SPFP

       efscfsi      Convert Floating-Point from Signed Integer                                     Scalar SPFP

       efscfuf      Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Fraction                                  Scalar SPFP

       efscfui      Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Integer                                   Scalar SPFP

   efscmpeq         Floating-Point Compare Equal                                                   Scalar SPFP


                                  e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-42                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                         Instruction Model


                                  Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                         Instruction Name                        Source

   efscmpgt     Floating-Point Compare Greater Than                                      Scalar SPFP

   efscmplt     Floating-Point Compare Less Than                                         Scalar SPFP

    efsctsf     Convert Floating-Point to Signed Fraction                                Scalar SPFP

    efsctsi     Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer                                 Scalar SPFP

    efsctsiz    Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer with Round toward Zero          Scalar SPFP

    efsctuf     Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Fraction                              Scalar SPFP

    efsctui     Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer                               Scalar SPFP

    efsctuiz    Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer with Round toward Zero        Scalar SPFP

    efsdiv      Floating-Point Divide                                                    Scalar SPFP

    efsmul      Floating-Point Multiply                                                  Scalar SPFP

    efsnabs     Floating-Point Negative Absolute Value                                   Scalar SPFP

    efsneg      Floating-Point Negate                                                    Scalar SPFP

    efssub      Floating-Point Subtract                                                  Scalar SPFP

   efststeq     Floating-Point Test Equal                                                Scalar SPFP

    efststgt    Floating-Point Test Greater Than                                         Scalar SPFP

    efststlt    Floating-Point Test Less Than                                            Scalar SPFP

 e_ldmvgprw     Load Multiple Volatile GPRs (r0, r3:r12)                                Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore

  e_ldmvsprw    Load Multiple Volatile SPRs (CR, LR, CTR, and XER)                      Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore

  e_ldmvsrrw    Load Multiple Volatile SRR (SRR0, SRR1)                                 Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore

 e_ldmvcsrrw    Load Multiple Volatile CSRR (CSRR0, CSRR1)                              Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore

 e_ldmvdsrrw    Load Multiple Volatile DSRR (DSRR0, DSRR1)                              Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore

      eqv       Equivalent                                                                  Book E

     eqv.       Equivalent and record CR                                                    Book E

 e_sdmvgprw     Store Multiple Volatile GPRs (r0, r3:r12)                               Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore

 e_sdmvsprw     Store Multiple Volatile SPRs (CR, LR, CTR, and XER)                     Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore

 e_sdmvsrrw     Store Multiple Volatile SRR (SRR0, SRR1)                                Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore

 e_sdmvcsrrw    Store Multiple Volatile CSRR (CSRR0, CSRR1)                             Volatile context
                                                                                         save/restore



                              e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                3-43
Instruction Model


                                      Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                         Instruction Name                                Source

 e_sdmvdsrrw        Store Multiple Volatile DSRR (DSRR0, DSRR1)                                  Volatile context
                                                                                                  save/restore

       evabs        Vector Absolute Value                                                             SPE

    evaddiw         Vector Add Immediate Word                                                         SPE

 evaddsmiaaw        Vector Add Signed, Modulo, Integer to Accumulator Word                            SPE

 evaddssiaaw        Vector Add Signed, Saturate, Integer to Accumulator Word                          SPE

 evaddumiaaw        Vector Add Unsigned, Modulo, Integer to Accumulator Word                          SPE

 evaddusiaaw        Vector Add Unsigned, Saturate, Integer to Accumulator Word                        SPE

       evaddw       Vector Add Word                                                                   SPE

       evand        Vector AND                                                                        SPE

       evandc       Vector AND with Complement                                                        SPE

   evcmpeq          Vector Compare Equal                                                              SPE

   evcmpgts         Vector Compare Greater Than Signed                                                SPE

   evcmpgtu         Vector Compare Greater Than Unsigned                                              SPE

   evcmplts         Vector Compare Less Than Signed                                                   SPE

   evcmpltu         Vector Compare Less Than Unsigned                                                 SPE

    evcntlsw        Vector Count Leading Sign Bits Word                                               SPE

    evcntlzw        Vector Count Leading Zeros Word                                                   SPE

    evdivws         Vector Divide Word Signed                                                         SPE

    evdivwu         Vector Divide Word Unsigned                                                       SPE

       eveqv        Vector Equivalent                                                                 SPE

       evextsb      Vector Extend Sign Byte                                                           SPE

       evextsh      Vector Extend Sign Half Word                                                      SPE

       evfsabs      Vector Floating-Point Absolute Value                                              SPE

       evfsabs      Floating-Point Absolute Value                                                 Vector SPFP

    evfsadd         Vector Floating-Point Add                                                         SPE

    evfsadd         Floating-Point Add                                                            Vector SPFP

    evfscfsf        Vector Convert Floating-Point from Signed Fraction                                SPE

    evfscfsf        Convert Floating-Point from Signed Fraction                                   Vector SPFP

       evfscfsi     Vector Convert Floating-Point from Signed Integer                                 SPE

       evfscfsi     Convert Floating-Point from Signed Integer                                    Vector SPFP

    evfscfuf        Vector Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Fraction                              SPE

    evfscfuf        Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Fraction                                 Vector SPFP



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-44                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                           Instruction Model


                                  Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                         Instruction Name                          Source

    evfscfui    Vector Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Integer                           SPE

    evfscfui    Convert Floating-Point from Unsigned Integer                               Vector SPFP

  evfscmpeq     Vector Floating-Point Compare Equal                                           SPE

  evfscmpeq     Floating-Point Compare Equal                                               Vector SPFP

  evfscmpgt     Vector Floating-Point Compare Greater Than                                    SPE

  evfscmpgt     Floating-Point Compare Greater Than                                        Vector SPFP

   evfscmplt    Vector Floating-Point Compare Less Than                                       SPE

   evfscmplt    Floating-Point Compare Less Than                                           Vector SPFP

    evfsctsf    Vector Convert Floating-Point to Signed Fraction                              SPE

    evfsctsf    Convert Floating-Point to Signed Fraction                                  Vector SPFP

    evfsctsi    Vector Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer                               SPE

    evfsctsi    Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer                                   Vector SPFP

   evfsctsiz    Vector Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer with Round toward Zero        SPE

   evfsctsiz    Convert Floating-Point to Signed Integer with Round toward Zero            Vector SPFP

   evfsctuf     Vector Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Fraction                            SPE

   evfsctuf     Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Fraction                                Vector SPFP

    evfsctui    Vector Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer                             SPE

    evfsctui    Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer                                 Vector SPFP

   evfsctuiz    Vector Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer with Round toward Zero      SPE

   evfsctuiz    Convert Floating-Point to Unsigned Integer with Round toward Zero          Vector SPFP

    evfsdiv     Vector Floating-Point Divide                                                  SPE

    evfsdiv     Floating-Point Divide                                                      Vector SPFP

    evfsmul     Vector Floating-Point Multiply                                                SPE

    evfsmul     Floating-Point Multiply                                                    Vector SPFP

   evfsnabs     Vector Floating-Point Negative Absolute Value                                 SPE

   evfsnabs     Floating-Point Negative Absolute Value                                     Vector SPFP

    evfsneg     Vector Floating-Point Negate                                                  SPE

    evfsneg     Floating-Point Negate                                                      Vector SPFP

    evfssub     Vector Floating-Point Subtract                                                SPE

    evfssub     Floating-Point Subtract                                                    Vector SPFP

   evfststeq    Vector Floating-Point Test Equal                                              SPE

   evfststeq    Floating-Point Test Equal                                                  Vector SPFP

   evfststgt    Vector Floating-Point Test Greater Than                                       SPE


                              e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                  3-45
Instruction Model


                                    Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                            Instruction Name                                      Source

    evfststgt       Floating-Point Test Greater Than                                                       Vector SPFP

    evfststlt       Vector Floating-Point Test Less Than                                                      SPE

    evfststlt       Floating-Point Test Less Than                                                          Vector SPFP

       evldd        Vector Load Double Word into Double Word                                                  SPE

       evlddx       Vector Load Double Word into Double Word Indexed                                          SPE

       evldh        Vector Load Double into Half Words                                                        SPE

       evldhx       Vector Load Double into Half Words Indexed                                                SPE

       evldw        Vector Load Double into Two Words                                                         SPE

       evldwx       Vector Load Double into Two Words Indexed                                                 SPE

  evlhhesplat       Vector Load Half Word into Half Words Even and Splat                                      SPE

 evlhhesplatx       Vector Load Half Word into Half Words Even and Splat Indexed                              SPE

 evlhhossplat       Vector Load Half Word into Half Word Odd Signed and Splat                                 SPE

 evlhhossplatx      Vector Load Half Word into Half Word Odd Signed and Splat Indexed                          SPE

 evlhhousplat       Vector Load Half Word into Half Word Odd Unsigned and Splat                               SPE

 evlhhousplatx      Vector Load Half Word into Half Word Odd Unsigned and Splat Indexed                       SPE

       evlwhe       Vector Load Word into Two Half Words Even                                                 SPE

    evlwhex         Vector Load Word into Two Half Words Even Indexed                                         SPE

    evlwhos         Vector Load Word into Half Words Odd Signed (with sign extension)                         SPE

   evlwhosx         Vector Load Word into Half Words Odd Signed Indexed (with sign extension)                 SPE

    evlwhou         Vector Load Word into Two Half Words Odd Unsigned (zero-extended)                         SPE

   evlwhoux         Vector Load Word into Two Half Words Odd Unsigned Indexed (zero-extended)                  SPE

   evlwhsplat       Vector Load Word into Half Words and Splat                                                SPE

  evlwhsplatx       Vector Load Word into Half Words and Splat Indexed                                        SPE

  evlwwsplat        Vector Load Word into Word and Splat                                                      SPE

  evlwwsplatx       Vector Load Word into Word and Splat Indexed                                              SPE

   evmergehi        Vector Merge High                                                                         SPE

  evmergehilo       Vector Merge High/Low                                                                     SPE

   evmergelo        Vector Merge Low                                                                           SPE

  evmergelohi       Vector Merge Low/High                                                                     SPE

 evmhegsmfaa        Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate             SPE

 evmhegsmfan        Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate              SPE
                    Negative

 evmhegsmiaa        Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                SPE



                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-46                                                                                                Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                      Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                       Instruction Name                                      Source

 evmhegsmian    Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate               SPE
                Negative

 evmhegumiaa    Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate             SPE

 evmhegumian    Multiply Half Words, Even, Guarded, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate             SPE
                Negative

  evmhesmf      Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Fractional                             SPE

  evmhesmfa     Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Fractional, Accumulate                 SPE

evmhesmfaaw Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate into             SPE
            Words

evmhesmfanw Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate                  SPE
            Negative into Words

  evmhesmi      Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Integer                                SPE

  evmhesmia     Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Integer, Accumulate                    SPE

evmhesmiaaw     Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate into Words      SPE

evmhesmianw Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative            SPE
            into Words

   evmhessf     Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Fractional                           SPE

  evmhessfa     Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Fractional, Accumulate               SPE

 evmhessfaaw    Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate into       SPE
                Words

 evmhessfanw    Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate            SPE
                Negative into Words

 evmhessiaaw    Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate into          SPE
                Words

 evmhessianw    Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative      SPE
                into Words

  evmheumi      Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                              SPE

  evmheumia     Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer, Accumulate                  SPE

evmheumiaaw Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate into              SPE
            Words

evmheumianw Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                   SPE
            Negative into Words

 evmheusiaaw    Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate into        SPE
                Words

 evmheusianw    Vector Multiply Half Words, Even, Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate             SPE
                Negative into Words

 evmhogsmfaa    Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate             SPE




                             e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                           3-47
Instruction Model


                                     Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                          Instruction Name                                            Source

 evmhogsmfan        Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate                  SPE
                    Negative

 evmhogsmiaa        Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                     SPE

 evmhogsmian        Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative            SPE

 evmhogumiaa        Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                   SPE

 evmhogumian        Multiply Half Words, Odd, Guarded, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                    SPE
                    Negative

   evmhosmf         Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Fractional                                   SPE

  evmhosmfa         Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Fractional, Accumulate                       SPE

evmhosmfaaw Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate into                        SPE
            Words

evmhosmfanw Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate Negative                    SPE
            into Words

   evmhosmi         Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Integer                                      SPE

  evmhosmia         Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Integer, Accumulate                          SPE

 evmhosmiaaw Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate into Words                   SPE

evmhosmianw Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative                       SPE
            into Words

   evmhossf         Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Fractional                                 SPE

  evmhossfa         Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Fractional, Accumulate                     SPE

 evmhossfaaw        Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate into              SPE
                    Words

 evmhossfanw        Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate                   SPE
                    Negative into Words

 evmhossiaaw        Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate into Words          SPE

 evmhossianw        Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative             SPE
                    into Words

   evmhoumi         Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                    SPE

  evmhoumia         Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer, Accumulate                        SPE

evmhoumiaaw Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate into                         SPE
            Words

evmhoumianw Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative                     SPE
            into Words

 evmhousiaaw        Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate into               SPE
                    Words

 evmhousianw        Vector Multiply Half Words, Odd, Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate                    SPE
                    Negative into Words




                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-48                                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                    Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                       Instruction Name                                    Source

    evmra       Initialize Accumulator                                                                 SPE

  evmwhsmf      Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Modulo, Fractional                                   SPE

  evmwhsmfa     Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate                    SPE

  evmwhsmi      Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Modulo, Integer                                      SPE

  evmwhsmia     Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                       SPE

  evmwhssf      Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Saturate, Fractional                                 SPE

  evmwhssfa     Vector Multiply Word High Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate                  SPE

  evmwhumi      Vector Multiply Word High Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                    SPE

  evmwhumia     Vector Multiply Word High Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                     SPE

   evmwlsmi     Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                     SPE

 evmwlsmiaaw    Vector Multiply Word Low Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate in Words               SPE

 evmwlsmianw    Vector Multiply Word Low Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative in Words      SPE

 evmwlssiaaw    Vector Multiply Word Low Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate in Words             SPE

 evmwlssianw    Vector Multiply Word Low Signed, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative in          SPE
                Words

  evmwlumia     Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                      SPE

 evmwlumiaaw    Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate in Words             SPE

evmwlumianw     Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative in          SPE
                Words

 evmwlusiaaw    Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate in Words           SPE

 evmwlusianw    Vector Multiply Word Low Unsigned, Saturate, Integer and Accumulate Negative in        SPE
                Words

   evmwsmf      Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Fractional                                        SPE

  evmwsmfa      Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate                         SPE

  evmwsmfaa     Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate                         SPE

  evmwsmfan     Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Fractional and Accumulate Negative                SPE

   evmwsmi      Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Integer                                           SPE

  evmwsmia      Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                            SPE

  evmwsmiaa     Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                            SPE

  evmwsmian     Vector Multiply Word Signed, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative                   SPE

   evmwssf      Vector Multiply Word Signed, Saturate, Fractional                                      SPE

   evmwssfa     Vector Multiply Word Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate                       SPE

  evmwssfaa     Vector Multiply Word Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate                       SPE

  evmwssfan     Vector Multiply Word Signed, Saturate, Fractional and Accumulate Negative              SPE



                              e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                         3-49
Instruction Model


                                       Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                            Instruction Name                                Source

   evmwumi          Vector Multiply Word Unsigned, Modulo, Integer                                      SPE

   evmwumia         Vector Multiply Word Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                       SPE

  evmwumiaa         Vector Multiply Word Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate                       SPE

  evmwumian         Vector Multiply Word Unsigned, Modulo, Integer and Accumulate Negative              SPE

       evnand       Vector NAND                                                                         SPE

       evneg        Vector Negate                                                                        SPE

        evnor       Vector NOR                                                                           SPE

        evor        Vector OR                                                                            SPE

        evorc       Vector OR with Complement                                                           SPE

        evrlw       Vector Rotate Left Word                                                              SPE

       evrlwi       Vector Rotate Left Word Immediate                                                   SPE

       evrndw       Vector Round Word                                                                    SPE

        evsel       Vector Select                                                                        SPE

        evslw       Vector Shift Left Word                                                               SPE

       evslwi       Vector Shift Left Word Immediate                                                    SPE

    evsplatfi       Vector Splat Fractional Immediate                                                   SPE

       evsplati     Vector Splat Immediate                                                              SPE

       evsrwis      Vector Shift Right Word Immediate Signed                                            SPE

       evsrwiu      Vector Shift Right Word Immediate Unsigned                                          SPE

       evsrws       Vector Shift Right Word Signed                                                      SPE

       evsrwu       Vector Shift Right Word Unsigned                                                    SPE

       evstdd       Vector Store Double of Double                                                       SPE

    evstddx         Vector Store Double of Double Indexed                                               SPE

       evstdh       Vector Store Double of Four Half Words                                              SPE

    evstdhx         Vector Store Double of Four Half Words Indexed                                       SPE

       evstdw       Vector Store Double of Two Words                                                    SPE

    evstdwx         Vector Store Double of Two Words Indexed                                            SPE

    evstwhe         Vector Store Word of Two Half Words from Even                                       SPE

   evstwhex         Vector Store Word of Two Half Words from Even Indexed                               SPE

    evstwho         Vector Store Word of Two Half Words from Odd                                        SPE

   evstwhox         Vector Store Word of Two Half Words from Odd Indexed                                SPE

    evstwwe         Vector Store Word of Word from Even                                                 SPE

   evstwwex         Vector Store Word of Word from Even Indexed                                         SPE


                                    e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-50                                                                                          Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                           Instruction Model


                                   Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                       Instruction Name                            Source

   evstwwo      Vector Store Word of Word from Odd                                            SPE

   evstwwox     Vector Store Word of Word from Odd Indexed                                    SPE

evsubfsmiaaw Vector Subtract Signed, Modulo, Integer to Accumulator Word                      SPE

 evsubfssiaaw   Vector Subtract Signed, Saturate, Integer to Accumulator Word                 SPE

evsubfumiaaw Vector Subtract Unsigned, Modulo, Integer to Accumulator Word                    SPE

 evsubfusiaaw   Vector Subtract Unsigned, Saturate, Integer to Accumulator Word               SPE

   evsubfw      Vector Subtract from Word                                                     SPE

   evsubifw     Vector Subtract Immediate from Word                                           SPE

     evxor      Vector XOR                                                                    SPE

     extsb      Extend Sign Byte                                                             Book E

    extsb.      Extend Sign Byte and record CR                                               Book E

     extsh      Extend Sign Half Word                                                        Book E

    extsh.      Extend Sign Half Word and record CR                                          Book E

   e_add16i     Add Immediate                                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_add2i.     Add (2 operand) Immediate and Record CR                                VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_add2is     Add (2 operand) Immediate Shifted                                      VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_addi      Add Immediate                                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_addi.     Add Immediate and Record                                               VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_addic     Add Immediate Carrying                                                 VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_addic.     Add Immediate Carrying and Record                                      VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_and2i.     AND (2 operand) Immediate & record CR                                  VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_and2is.    AND (2 operand) Immediate Shifted & record CR                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_andi      AND Immediate                                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_andi.     AND Immediate and Record                                               VLE (16-bit opcodes)

      e_b       Branch                                                                 VLE (16-bit opcodes)

     e_bc       Branch Conditional                                                     VLE (16-bit opcodes)

     e_bcl      Branch Conditional & Link                                              VLE (16-bit opcodes)

     e_bl       Branch & Link                                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_cmp16i     Compare Immediate                                                      VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_cmph      Compare Halfword                                                       VLE (16-bit opcodes)

  e_cmph16i     Compare Halfword Immediate                                             VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_cmphl      Compare Halfword Logical                                               VLE (16-bit opcodes)

  e_cmphl16i    Compare Halfword Logical Immediate                                     VLE (16-bit opcodes)


                             e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                3-51
Instruction Model


                                       Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                         Instruction Name                                Source

       e_cmpi       Compare Immediate                                                         VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_cmpl16i        Compare Logical Immediate                                                 VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_cmpli      Compare Logical Immediate                                                 VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_crand         Condition Register AND                                                    VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_crandc         Condition Register AND with Complement                                    VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_creqv         Condition Register Equivalent                                             VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_crnand         Condition Register NAND                                                   VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_crnor      Condition Register NOR                                                    VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_cror       Condition Register OR                                                     VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_crorc      Condition Register OR with Complement                                     VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_crxor      Condition Register XOR                                                    VLE (16-bit opcodes)

        e_lbz       Load Byte & Zero                                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_lbzu       Load Byte & Zero with Update                                              VLE (16-bit opcodes)

        e_lha       Load Halfword Algebraic                                                   VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_lhau       Load Halfword Algebraic With Update                                       VLE (16-bit opcodes)

        e_lhz       Load Halfword & Zero                                                      VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_lhzu       Load Halfword & Zero with Update                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

         e_li       Load Immediate                                                            VLE (16-bit opcodes)

        e_lis       Load Immediate Shifted                                                    VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_lmw        Load Multiple Word                                                        VLE (16-bit opcodes)

        e_lwz       Load Word & Zero                                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_lwzu       Load Word & Zero with Update                                              VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_mcrf       Move Condition Register Field                                             VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_mull2i        Multiply Low Word (2 operand) Immediate                                   VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_mulli      Multiply Low Immediate                                                    VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_or2i       OR (2 operand) Immediate                                                  VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_or2is      OR (2 operand) Immediate Shifted                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

        e_ori       OR Immediate                                                              VLE (16-bit opcodes)

        e_ori.      OR Immediate and Record                                                   VLE (16-bit opcodes)

        e_rlw       Rotate Left Word                                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_rlw.       Rotate Left Word & record CR                                              VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_rlwi       Rotate Left Word Immediate                                                VLE (16-bit opcodes)

       e_rlwi.      Rotate Left Word Immediate & record CR                                    VLE (16-bit opcodes)


                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-52                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                           Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                       Instruction Name                            Source

   e_rlwimi     Rotate Left Word Immed then Mask Insert                                VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_rlwinm     Rotate Left Word Immed then AND with Mask                              VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_slwi      Shift Left Word Immediate                                              VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_slwi.     Shift Left Word Immediate & record CR                                  VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_srwi      Shift Right Word Immediate                                             VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_srwi.     Shift Right Word Immediate & record CR                                 VLE (16-bit opcodes)

     e_stb      Store Byte                                                             VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_stbu      Store Byte with Update                                                 VLE (16-bit opcodes)

     e_sth      Store Halfword                                                         VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_sthu      Store Halfword with Update                                             VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_stmw      Store Multiple Word                                                    VLE (16-bit opcodes)

     e_stw      Store Word                                                             VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_stwu      Store Word with Update                                                 VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_subfic     Subtract from Immediate Carrying                                       VLE (16-bit opcodes)

   e_subfic.    Subtract from Immediate and Record                                     VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_xori      XOR Immediate                                                          VLE (16-bit opcodes)

    e_xori.     XOR Immediate and Record                                               VLE (16-bit opcodes)

     icbi 2     Instruction Cache Block Invalidate                                           Book E

    icblc 2     Instruction Cache Block Lock Clear                                        Cache locking

     icbt 2     Instruction Cache Block Touch                                                Book E

    icbtls 2    Instruction Cache Block Touch and Lock Set                                Cache locking

      isel      Integer Select                                                                 EIS

     isync      Instruction Synchronize                                                      Book E

      lbz       Load Byte and Zero                                                           Book E

     lbzu       Load Byte and Zero with Update                                               Book E

     lbzux      Load Byte and Zero with Update Indexed                                       Book E

     lbzx       Load Byte and Zero Indexed                                                   Book E

      lha       Load Half Word Algebraic                                                     Book E

     lhau       Load Half Word Algebraic with Update                                         Book E

     lhaux      Load Half Word Algebraic with Update Indexed                                 Book E

     lhax       Load Half Word Algebraic Indexed                                             Book E

     lhbrx      Load Half Word Byte-Reverse Indexed                                          Book E

      lhz       Load Half Word and Zero                                                      Book E


                             e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                3-53
Instruction Model


                                     Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                           Instruction Name                              Source

        lhzu        Load Half Word and Zero with Update                                             Book E

        lhzux       Load Half Word and Zero with Update Indexed                                     Book E

        lhzx        Load Half Word and Zero Indexed                                                 Book E

        lmw         Load Multiple Word                                                              Book E

        lwarx       Load Word and Reserve Indexed                                                   Book E

        lwbrx       Load Word Byte-Reverse Indexed                                                  Book E

         lwz        Load Word and Zero                                                              Book E

        lwzu        Load Word and Zero with Update                                                  Book E

       lwzux        Load Word and Zero with Update Indexed                                          Book E

        lwzx        Load Word and Zero Indexed                                                      Book E

       mbar 3       Memory Barrier                                                                  Book E

        mcrf        Move Condition Register Field                                                   Book E

       mcrxr        Move to Condition Register from XER                                             Book E

        mfcr        Move From Condition Register                                                    Book E

       mfdcr4       Move From Device Control Register                                               Book E

    mfdcrx4         Move From Device Control Register Indexed                                       Book E

       mfmsr        Move From Machine State Register                                                Book E

       mfspr        Move From Special Purpose Register                                              Book E

       msync 3      Memory Synchronize                                                              Book E

        mtcrf       Move To Condition Register Fields                                               Book E

       mtdcr4       Move To Device Control Register                                                 Book E

    mtdcrx4         Move To Device Control Register Indexed                                         Book E

       mtmsr        Move To Machine State Register                                                  Book E

       mtspr        Move To Special Purpose Register                                                Book E

       mulhw        Multiply High Word                                                              Book E

       mulhw.       Multiply High Word and record CR                                                Book E

    mulhwu          Multiply High Word Unsigned                                                     Book E

    mulhwu.         Multiply High Word Unsigned and record CR                                       Book E

        mulli       Multiply Low Immediate                                                          Book E

       mullw        Multiply Low Word                                                               Book E

       mullw.       Multiply Low Word and record CR                                                 Book E

       mullwo       Multiply Low Word and record OV                                                 Book E

       mullwo.      Multiply Low Word and record OV and CR                                          Book E


                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-54                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                            Instruction Model


                                 Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                       Instruction Name                             Source

     nand       NAND                                                                          Book E

     nand.      NAND and record CR                                                            Book E

      neg       Negate                                                                        Book E

     neg.       Negate and record CR                                                          Book E

     nego       Negate and record OV                                                          Book E

     nego.      Negate and record OV and record CR                                            Book E

      nor       NOR                                                                           Book E

      nor.      NOR and record CR                                                             Book E

      or        OR                                                                            Book E

      or.       OR and record CR                                                              Book E

      orc       OR with Complement                                                            Book E

      orc.      OR with Complement and record CR                                              Book E

      ori       OR Immediate                                                                  Book E

      oris      OR Immediate Shifted                                                          Book E

      rfci      Return From Critical Interrupt                                                Book E

      rfdi      Return From Debug Interrupt                                                   Debug

      rfi       Return From Interrupt                                                         Book E

    rlwimi      Rotate Left Word Immed then Mask Insert                                       Book E

    rlwimi.     Rotate Left Word Immed then Mask Insert and record CR                         Book E

    rlwinm      Rotate Left Word Immed then AND with Mask                                     Book E

    rlwinm.     Rotate Left Word Immed then AND with Mask and record CR                       Book E

    rlwnm       Rotate Left Word then AND with Mask                                           Book E

    rlwnm.      Rotate Left Word then AND with Mask and record CR                             Book E

      sc        System Call                                                                   Book E

    se_add      Add                                                                     VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_addi     Add Immediate                                                           VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_and      AND                                                                     VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_and.     AND and Record                                                          VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_andc      AND with Complement                                                     VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_andi     And Immediate                                                           VLE (32-bit opcodes)

     se_b       Branch                                                                  VLE (32-bit opcodes)

     se_bc      Branch Conditional                                                      VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_bclri    Bit Clear Immediate                                                     VLE (32-bit opcodes)


                              e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                 3-55
Instruction Model


                                       Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                           Instruction Name                              Source

       se_bctr      Branch to Count Register                                                  VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_bctrl        Branch to Count Register & Link                                           VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_bgeni         Bit Generate Immediate                                                    VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_bl        Branch and Link                                                           VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_blr       Branch to Link Register                                                   VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_blrl      Branch to Link Register & Link                                            VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_bmaski        Bit Mask Generate Immediate                                               VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_bseti        Bit Set Immediate                                                         VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_btsti        Bit Test Immediate                                                        VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_cmp       Compare                                                                   VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_cmph          Compare Halfword                                                          VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_cmphl         Compare Halfword Logical                                                  VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_cmpi         Compare Immediate                                                         VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_cmpl         Compare Logical                                                           VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_cmpli         Compare Logical Immediate                                                 VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_extsb         Extend Sign Byte                                                          VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_extsh         Extend Sign Halfword                                                      VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_extzb        Extend with Zeros Byte                                                    VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_extzh        Extend with Zeros Halfword                                                VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_illegal       Illegal                                                                   VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_isync        Instruction Synchronize                                                   VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_lbz       Load Byte and Zero                                                        VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_lhz       Load Halfword and Zero                                                    VLE (32-bit opcodes)

        se_li       Load Immediate                                                            VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_lwz       Load Word and Zero                                                        VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_mfar         Move from Alternate Register                                              VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_mfctr        Move From Count Register                                                  VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_mflr      Move From Link Register                                                   VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_mr        Move Register                                                             VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_mtar         Move to Alternate Register                                                VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_mtctr        Move To Count Register                                                    VLE (32-bit opcodes)

       se_mtlr      Move To Link Register                                                     VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_mullw         Multiply Low Word                                                         VLE (32-bit opcodes)


                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-56                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                            Instruction Model


                                   Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                       Instruction Name                             Source

    se_neg      Negate                                                                  VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_not      NOT                                                                     VLE (32-bit opcodes)

     se_or      OR                                                                      VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_rfci     Return From Critical Interrupt                                          VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_rfdi     Return From Debug Interrupt                                             VLE (32-bit opcodes)

     se_rfi     Return From Interrupt                                                   VLE (32-bit opcodes)

     se_sc      System Call                                                             VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_slw      Shift Left Word                                                         VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_slwi     Shift Left Word Immediate                                               VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_sraw      Shift Right Algebraic Word                                              VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_srawi     Shift Right Algebraic Word Immediate                                    VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_srw      Shift Right Word                                                        VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_srwi     Shift Right Word Immediate                                              VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_stb      Store Byte                                                              VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_sth      Store Halfword                                                          VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_stw      Store Word                                                              VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_sub      Subtract                                                                VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_subf     Subtract From                                                           VLE (32-bit opcodes)

    se_subi     Subtract Immediate                                                      VLE (32-bit opcodes)

   se_subi.     Subtract Immediate and Record                                           VLE (32-bit opcodes)

      slw       Shift Left Word                                                               Book E

      slw.      Shift Left Word and record CR                                                 Book E

     sraw       Shift Right Algebraic Word                                                    Book E

     sraw.      Shift Right Algebraic Word and record CR                                      Book E

     srawi      Shift Right Algebraic Word Immediate                                          Book E

     srawi.     Shift Right Algebraic Word Immediate and record CR                            Book E

      srw       Shift Right Word                                                              Book E

     srw.       Shift Right Word and record CR                                                Book E

      stb       Store Byte                                                                    Book E

     stbu       Store Byte with Update                                                        Book E

     stbux      Store Byte with Update Indexed                                                Book E

     stbx       Store Byte Indexed                                                            Book E

      sth       Store Half Word                                                               Book E


                              e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                 3-57
Instruction Model


                                    Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

   Mnemonic                                          Instruction Name                               Source

       sthbrx       Store Half Word Byte-Reverse Indexed                                            Book E

        sthu        Store Half Word with Update                                                     Book E

       sthux        Store Half Word with Update Indexed                                             Book E

        sthx        Store Half Word Indexed                                                         Book E

       stmw         Store Multiple Word                                                             Book E

        stw         Store Word                                                                      Book E

       stwbrx       Store Word Byte-Reverse Indexed                                                 Book E

       stwcx.       Store Word Conditional Indexed and record CR                                    Book E

        stwu        Store Word with Update                                                          Book E

       stwux        Store Word with Update Indexed                                                  Book E

        stwx        Store Word Indexed                                                              Book E

        subf        Subtract From                                                                   Book E

        subf.       Subtract From and record CR                                                     Book E

       subfc        Subtract From Carrying                                                          Book E

       subfc.       Subtract From Carrying and record CR                                            Book E

       subfco       Subtract From Carrying and record OV                                            Book E

       subfco.      Subtract From Carrying and record OV and CR                                     Book E

       subfe        Subtract From Extended with CA                                                  Book E

       subfe.       Subtract From Extended with CA and record CR                                    Book E

       subfeo       Subtract From Extended with CA and record OV                                    Book E

       subfeo.      Subtract From Extended with CA and record OV and CR                             Book E

       subfic       Subtract From Immediate Carrying                                                Book E

       subfme       Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA                                        Book E

    subfme.         Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record CR                          Book E

    subfmeo         Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record OV                          Book E

   subfmeo.         Subtract From Minus One Extended with CA and record OV and CR                   Book E

       subfo        Subtract From and record OV                                                     Book E

       subfo.       Subtract From and record OV and CR                                              Book E

       subfze       Subtract From Zero Extended with CA                                             Book E

       subfze.      Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record CR                               Book E

    subfzeo         Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record OV                               Book E

    subfzeo.        Subtract From Zero Extended with CA and record OV and CR                        Book E

       tlbivax      TLB Invalidate Virtual Address Indexed                                          Book E


                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-58                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Instruction Model


                                  Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

  Mnemonic                                        Instruction Name                      Source

     tlbre      TLB Read Entry                                                           Book E

     tlbsx      TLB Search Indexed                                                       Book E

    tlbsync     TLB Synchronize                                                          Book E

     tlbwe      TLB Write Entry                                                          Book E

      tw        Trap Word                                                                Book E

      twi       Trap Word Immediate                                                      Book E

     wrtee      Write External Enable                                                    Book E

    wrteei      Write External Enable Immediate                                          Book E

      xor       XOR                                                                      Book E

      xor.      XOR and record CR                                                        Book E




                             e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                            3-59
Instruction Model


                                    Table 3-13. Full Instruction Listing (continued)

    Mnemonic                                        Instruction Name                                             Source

       xori         XOR Immediate                                                                                Book E

       xoris        XOR Immediate Shifted                                                                        Book E
1
  An implementation can restrict the number of bits specified in a mask. Devices that implements 16-bit instructions are limited
  to 16 bits, which allows the user to perform bit-reversed address computations for 65536-byte samples.
2
  Not supported by e200z3 unless the integrated device includes a cache; treated as no-ops, with the exception of dcbz, which
  results in an alignment interrupt, and dcbi, which is treated as a privileged no-op.
3
  See Section 3.7, “Memory Synchronization and Reservation Instructions.”
4
  The core CPU will take an illegal instruction exception for unsupported DCR values.




                                 e200z3 Power Architecture Core Reference Manual, Rev. 2
3-60                                                                                                  Freescale Semiconductor