Chapter 4
Instruction Model
This chapter provides information about the instruction set as it is defined by the Power ISA and the
Freescale EIS. It includes the following sections:
   • Section 4.1, “Operand Conventions”
   • Section 4.2, “Instruction Set Characteristics”
   • Section 4.3, “Classes of Instructions”
   • Section 4.4, “Forms of Defined Instructions”
   • Section 4.5, “Instruction-Related Exceptions”
   • Section 4.6, “Instruction Summary”
   • Section 4.7, “Instruction Listing”
Full descriptions of each instruction, including opcode, syntax, affected registers, related interrupts, and
RTL (register transfer language) are provided in Chapter 5, “Instruction Set”; such descriptions for the
VLE, SPE, and AltiVec instructions are provided in their respective programming environments manuals
(PEMs).

4.1       Operand Conventions
This section describes operand conventions as they are represented in the architecture. Detailed
descriptions are provided of conventions used for storing values in registers and memory, accessing
processor registers, and representing data in these registers.

4.1.1        Data Organization in Memory and Data Transfers
Bytes in memory are numbered consecutively starting with 0. Each number is the address of the
corresponding byte.
Memory operands can be bytes, half words, words, double words, quad words <V>, or, for the load/store
multiple instruction type and load/store string instructions, a sequence of bytes or words. The address of a
memory operand is the address of its first byte (that is, of its lowest-numbered byte). Operand length is
implicit for each instruction.

4.1.2        Alignment and Misaligned Accesses
The operand of a single-register memory access instruction has an alignment boundary equal to its length.
An operand’s address is misaligned if it is not a multiple of its width.
The concept of alignment is also applied more generally to data in memory. For example, a 12-byte data
item is said to be word-aligned if its address is a multiple of four.

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                   4-1
Instruction Model


Some instructions require their memory operands to have certain alignment. In addition, alignment can
affect performance. For single-register memory access instructions, the best performance is obtained when
memory operands are aligned.
Instructions are 32 bits (one word) long and must be word-aligned. Note, however, that category VLE
provides both 16- and 32-bit instructions and in this case, instructions may be half word-aligned. See the
VLE PEM.
This table lists characteristics for memory operands for single-register memory access instructions.
                             Table 4-1. Address Characteristics of Aligned Operands

                                  Operand              Operand Length       Addr[60–63] if Aligned

                         Byte (or string)                    8 bits                   xxxx1
                         Half word                          2 bytes                   xxx0
                         Word                               4 bytes                   xx00
                         Double word                        8 bytes                   x000
                         Quad word                          16 bytes                  0000
                        1
                            An x in an address bit position indicates that the bit can be 0 or 1
                            independent of the state of other bits in the address.

An lmw, stmw, lbarx <ER>, lharx <ER>, lwarx, ldarx <64>, stbcx.<ER>, sthcx.<ER>, stwcx., or stdcx.
<64> instruction for which the effective address is not properly aligned causes an alignment exception.

4.1.3         Atomic Accesses
A memory access is “single-copy atomic,” or simply “atomic,” if it is always performed in its entirety with
no visible fragmentation. Atomic memory accesses are thus serialized: each happens in its entirety in some
order, even when that order is not specified in the program or enforced between processors.
Vector accesses are not guaranteed to be atomic. The following other types of single-register accesses are
always atomic:
   • Byte accesses (all bytes are aligned on byte boundaries)
   • Halfword accesses aligned on halfword boundaries
   • Word accesses aligned on word boundaries
   • Doubleword accesses aligned on doubleword boundaries
No other accesses are guaranteed to be atomic. For example, the access caused by the following
instructions is not guaranteed to be atomic:
    • Any load or store instruction for which the operand is unaligned
    • lmw, stmw
    • Any cache management instruction
An access that is not atomic is performed as a set of smaller disjoint atomic accessed for which the order
and the number of times the atomic accesses are performed may vary between implementations.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-2                                                                                                  Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


The results for several combinations of loads and stores to the same or overlapping locations are described
below.
    1. When two processors execute atomic stores to locations that do not overlap, and no other stores are
       performed to those locations, the contents of those locations are the same as if the two stores were
       performed by a single processor.
    2. When two processors execute atomic stores to the same storage location, and no other store is
       performed to that location, the contents of that location are the result stored by one of the
       processors.
    3. When two processors execute stores that have the same target location and are not guaranteed to
       be atomic, and no other store is performed to that location, the result is some combination of the
       bytes stored by both processors.
    4. When two processors execute stores to overlapping locations, and no other store is performed to
       those locations, the result is some combination of the bytes stored by the processors to the
       overlapping bytes. The portions of the locations that do not overlap contain the bytes stored by the
       processor storing to the location.
    5. When a processor executes an atomic store to a location, a second processor executes an atomic
       load from that location, and no other store is performed to that location, the value returned by the
       load is the contents of the location before the store or the contents of the location after the store.
    6. When a load and a store with the same target location can be executed simultaneously, and no other
       store is performed to that location, the value returned by the load is some combination of the
       contents of the location before the store and the contents of the location after the store.
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                Non atomic memory accesses (particularly misaligned or lmw/stmw
                accesses), may be interrupted and parts of the accesses may be performed
                again after the interrupt returns. Also, the order for which non atomic
                accesses occur may vary between implementations. For example, a
                misaligned lwz instruction which spans a page boundary for which one of
                the page translations is not in the TLB, can cause the access to be partially
                performed to one of the pages and also result in an a data TLB error (for the
                page translation not in the TLB). When the data TLB error handler
                establishes the missing TLB entry and returns from the interrupt, the lwz
                will be re-executed, and the partially performed access will occur again
                along with the access to the page that previously resulted in a data TLB
                error.

4.2       Instruction Set Characteristics
Instructions are presented in the following functional categories:
                                                   NOTE
                •   AltiVec instructions are described in the AltiVec PEM.
                •   VLE instructions are described in the VLE PEM.
                •   SPE instructions are described in the SPE PEM.

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-3
Instruction Model


Integer              Arithmetic and logical instructions. See Section 4.6.1.1, “Integer Instructions.”
Load and store       See Section 4.6.1.2, “Load and Store Instructions.” Note that the AltiVec and SPE
                     instructions define additional load store instructions, which are listed in
                     Section 4.7, “Instruction Listing,” and described fully in their respective
                     programming environments manuals.
Floating-point       The Power ISA defines the following two floating-point instruction sets:
                     The category floating-point instructions, derived from the original PowerPC
                     architecture. described in Section 4.6.1.3, “Floating-Point Instructions <FP>.”
                     The embedded floating-point vector and scalar arithmetic instructions that are
                     defined as part of category SPE. These instructions are described in the SPE PEM.
Flow control         Branching, CR logical, trap, and other instructions that can alter instruction flow.
                     See Section 4.6.1.8, “Branch and Flow Control Instructions.”
Processor control    Used for determining and controlling processor behavior. See Section 4.6.1.13,
                     “Processor Control Instructions.”
Memory synchronization
                     Ensure that operations occur in the appropriate context within an out-of-order
                     execution environment. See Section 4.6.1.15, “Memory Synchronization
                     Instructions.”
Memory control       Provide control of caches and TLBs. See Section 4.6.1.17, “Cache Management
                     Instructions.” and Section 4.6.2.2, “Supervisor-Level Memory Control
                     Instructions.”
Note that these groupings do not indicate the execution unit that processes a particular instruction or group
of instructions. This information, which is useful for scheduling instructions most effectively, is provided
in the instruction timing chapter of the core reference manual.
Integer instructions operate on word or double word operands; floating-point instructions operate on
single-precision and double-precision floating-point operands.
The base architecture provides for byte, half-word, word, and double word operand loads and stores
between memory and a set of 32 general-purpose registers (GPRs). For base 32-bit implementations, GPRs
do not support double-word operands.
It provides for word and double-word operand loads and stores between memory and a set of 32
floating-point registers (FPRs). <FP>
SPE instructions, in either 32- or 64-bit implementations, employ 64-bit GPRs for all vector or
double-precision floating-point operations. <SPE>
AltiVec instructions employ a set of thirty-two, 128-bit vector registers (VRs) to support
single-instruction, multiple-data (SIMD) operations. <V>
Arithmetic and logical instructions do not read or modify memory. To use the contents of a memory
location in a computation and then modify the same or another location, the memory contents must be
loaded into a register, modified, and then written to the target location using load and store instructions.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-4                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


<Decorated Storage>:
Depending on the device to which decorated storage instructions address, the device may perform
computation directly on a memory location. See the integrated device reference manual.
The description of each instruction includes the mnemonic and a formatted list of operands. To simplify
assembly language programming, a set of simplified mnemonics and symbols is provided for some of the
frequently used instructions; see Appendix C, “Simplified Mnemonics,” for a complete list of simplified
mnemonics. Programs written to be portable across the various assemblers for the architecture should not
assume the existence of mnemonics not described in that document. Supported simplified mnemonics are
also listed in the alphabetical listing of opcodes in Appendix B, “Instruction Set Listings.”

4.3       Classes of Instructions
An instruction falls into exactly one of the following three classes:
   • Defined
   • Illegal
   • Reserved
The class is determined by examining the opcode, and the extended opcode if any. If the opcode, or
combination of opcode and extended opcode, is not that of a defined instruction or of a reserved
instruction, the instruction is illegal.

4.3.1        Defined Instruction Class
The defined instruction class contains all instruction defined in this document and those defined in other
associated programming environments manuals referenced elsewhere in this document.
A defined instruction can have preferred and/or invalid forms, as described in Section 4.4.1, “Preferred
Instruction Forms,” and Section 4.4.2, “Invalid Instruction Forms.” Instructions that are part of a category
that is not supported are treated as illegal instructions, unless that particular encoding is defined by a
category that is supported (in which case it is said to be defined as part of that category).

4.3.2        Illegal Instruction Class
This class of instructions contains the set of instructions described below. Illegal instructions are available
for future extensions of the Power ISA; that is, some future version of the Power ISA may define any of
these instructions to perform new functions.
Any attempt to execute an illegal instruction causes the system illegal instruction error handler to be
invoked and has no other effect.
An instruction consisting entirely of binary 0s is guaranteed always to be an illegal instruction. This
increases the probability that an attempt to execute data or uninitialized storage results in the invocation
of the system illegal instruction error handler. The system illegal instruction handler may also be invoked
for instructions that are part of the defined instruction class for which the processor does not implement
the instruction.



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-5
Instruction Model


With the exception of the instruction consisting entirely of binary 0s, the instructions in this class are
available for future extensions of the Power ISA; that is, some future version of the Power ISA may define
any of these instructions to perform new functions.
The following primary opcodes are illegal:
   • 1, 5, 6, 57, 60, 61
The following primary opcodes have unused extended opcodes. All unused extended opcodes are illegal:
   • 4, 19, 30, 31, 56, 58, 59, 62, 63

4.3.3         Reserved Instruction Class
Reserved instructions are allocated to specific purposes that are outside the scope of the Power ISA. This
class of instructions contains the set of instructions described as follows:
    • The instruction having primary opcode 0, except the instruction consisting entirely of binary 0s
        (which is an illegal instruction; Section 4.3.2, “Illegal Instruction Class”) and the extended opcode
        256 (Service Processor “Attention”)
    • Instructions for the Power Architecture® that have not been included in the Power ISA
    • Implementation-specific instructions used to conform to the Power ISA specification
    • Any other implementation-dependent instructions that are not defined in the Power ISA
Any attempt to execute a reserved instruction results in one of the following:
   • Performs the actions described by the implementation if the instruction is implemented
   • Causes an illegal instruction exception if the instruction is not implemented.
Instructions that are implementation specific are considered to be a part of the reserved instruction class
and are not defined in this document. Any such implementation specific instructions are described in the
core reference manual that implements the instructions. Software should carefully consider when using an
implementation specific instruction since that instruction may not be implemented in any other processors,
or even in a future major revision of a processor.

4.3.4         Reserved Fields and Reserved Values
Reserved fields in instructions are ignored by the processor, although this is being phased into the
embedded environment and some processors will not ignore reserved fields and will treat non-zero bits in
a reserved field as an illegal instruction.
Some defined instruction fields have reserved values; for example, where an instruction layout contains a
fixed value. In such cases all other values for that field are reserved. In general, if an instruction is coded
such that a defined field contains a reserved value, the instruction form is invalid (see Section 4.4.2,
“Invalid Instruction Forms”). However, that does not apply to portions of defined fields that the instruction
description specifies as being treated as reserved.
To maximize compatibility with future architecture extensions, software must ensure that reserved fields
in instructions contain zero and that defined fields of instructions do not contain reserved values.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-6                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                    Instruction Model


The handling of reserved bits in system registers, such as XER and FPSCR, is implementation-dependent.
Unless otherwise stated, software can write any value to such a bit. A subsequent reading of the bit returns
0 if the value last written to the bit was 0 and returns an undefined value (0 or 1) otherwise.
In some cases a defined field of a system register has certain values that are reserved. Software must not
set a defined field of a system register to a reserved value.
References elsewhere in this document to a defined field (in an instruction or system register) that has
reserved values assume the field does not contain a reserved value, unless otherwise stated or obvious from
context.
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                Assemblers should report uses of reserved values of defined fields of
                instructions as errors.
                                 NOTE: Software Considerations
                Software must preserve reserved bits in system registers because they may
                be assigned a meaning in a future version of the architecture. To do so in
                implementation-independent fashion, software should do the following:
                •   Initialize such registers by supplying zeros for all reserved bits.
                •   Alter defined bits in the register by reading the register, altering only the
                    desired bits, and then writing the new value back to the register.
                However, software can alter XER and FPSCR status bits, preserving the
                reserved bits by executing instructions that have the side effect of altering
                the status bits. Similarly, software can alter any defined FPSCR bit by
                executing an FPSCR instruction. Such instructions are likely to yield better
                performance than the method described in the second bullet above.

4.4       Forms of Defined Instructions
Defined instructions may have preferred or invalid forms, as described in the following sections.

4.4.1        Preferred Instruction Forms
Some defined instructions have forms that are preferred that execute more efficiently than alternative
forms, which may take significantly longer to execute. Instructions with preferred forms are as follows:
   • The CR logical instructions
   • The load/store multiple instructions
   • The OR Immediate instruction (ori) (preferred form of no-op)
   • The Move To Condition Register Fields (mtcrf) instruction
   • The TLB Invalidate Virtual Address Indexed (tlbivax) instruction.
   • The TLB Invalidate Local Indexed (tlbilx) instruction <E.HV>.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                          4-7
Instruction Model


4.4.2         Invalid Instruction Forms
Some defined instructions can be coded in a form that is invalid. For example, if one or more fields of the
instruction, excluding opcode fields, are coded incorrectly in a manner that can be deduced by examining
only the instruction encoding.
In general, attempts to execute an invalid form either invoke an illegal instruction exception or yield
boundedly undefined results. Any divergence from this is stated in the instruction descriptions. Some older
processors may take an unimplemented operation exception instead of an illegal instruction exception.
Some instruction forms are invalid because the instruction contains a reserved value in a defined field (see
Section 4.3.4, “Reserved Fields and Reserved Values”); these invalid forms are not discussed further. All
other invalid forms are identified in the instruction descriptions.
References to instructions elsewhere in this document assume the instruction form is not invalid, unless
otherwise stated or obvious from context.
                                     NOTE: Software Considerations
                    Assemblers should report uses of invalid instruction forms as errors.

4.5         Instruction-Related Exceptions
Exceptions can be caused directly by the execution of an instruction or by an asynchronous event. Either
kind of exception may cause one of several components of the system software to be invoked.
The exceptions that can be caused directly by the execution of an instruction include the following:


      •   An attempt to execute a reserved-illegal instruction (illegal instruction exception type program
          interrupt)
      •   An attempt by an application program to execute a privileged instruction (privileged instruction
          exception type program interrupt)
      •   An attempt by a guest supervisor system program to execute a hypervisor privileged instruction
          (embedded hypervisor privilege interrupt) <E.HV>
      •   Attempted execution of an instruction that is not provided by the implementation (illegal
          instruction exception type program interrupt). Some implementations may instead produce an
          unimplemented operation exception type program interrupt.
      •   An attempt by an application program to access a privileged SPR (privileged instruction exception
          type program interrupt)
      •   An attempt by an application program to access an SPR that does not exist (illegal instruction
          exception type program interrupt)
      •   An attempt by a system program to access an SPR that does not exist (boundedly undefined results
          or illegal instruction exception type program interrupt)
      •   An attempt by a guest supervisor system program to access an SPR that is hypervisor privileged
          (embedded hypervisor privilege interrupt) <E.HV>



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-8                                                                                         Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


    •   The execution of a defined instruction using an invalid form (illegal instruction exception type
        program interrupt or privileged instruction exception type program interrupt)
    •   An attempt to access a storage location that is either unavailable (instruction or data TLB error
        interrupt) or not permitted (instruction or data storage interrupt)
    •   An attempt to access storage with an effective address alignment not supported by the
        implementation (alignment interrupt)
    •   The execution of an sc instruction (system call interrupt or embedded hypervisor system call
        interrupt <E.HV>)
    •   The execution of a trap instruction whose trap condition is met (trap type program interrupt)
    •   The execution of an ehpriv instruction (embedded hypervisor privilege interrupt) <E.HV>
    •   The execution of a dnh instruction (illegal instruction exception type program interrupt or debug
        halt if enabled by external debugger)
    •   Attempted execution of a floating-point instruction when floating-point instructions are
        unavailable (floating-point unavailable interrupt) <FP>
    •   The execution of a floating-point instruction that causes a floating-point enabled exception to exist
        (enabled exception type program interrupt) <FP>
    •   The execution of an instruction which encounters an error reported by hardware, which cannot
        complete execution without the possibility that incorrect state could be propagated to architectural
        processor state (error report interrupt).
    •   Attempted execution of an SPE or embedded floating-point instruction which could modify the
        upper 32 bits of a GPR when the SPE or embedded floating-point instructions are unavailable (SPE
        unavailable interrupt) <SP, SP.FV, SP.FD>
    •   The execution of an embedded floating-point instruction that causes an embedded floating-point
        data exception to exist (embedded floating-point data interrupt) <SP.FV, SP.FS, SP.FD.>
    •   The execution of an embedded floating-point instruction that causes an embedded floating-point
        round exception to exist (embedded floating-point round interrupt) <SP.FV, SP.FS, SP.FD.>
    •   Attempted execution of a vector instruction when vector instructions are unavailable (AltiVec
        unavailable interrupt) <V>
    •   The execution of a vector floating-point instruction that uses a denormalized input value (AltiVec
        assist interrupt) <V.>
    •   Execution or attempted execution of an instruction and a precise synchronous debug event occurs
        (debug interrupt)
Exceptions that can be caused by an asynchronous event are defined by the guest supervisor and
hypervisor programming models. Exceptions and the interrupts associated with them are described in
Chapter 7, “Interrupts and Exceptions.”
The invocation of the system error handler is precise. Although PowerISA allows for imprecise exceptions
for floating-point enabled exceptions, EIS requires that such exceptions be precise and if one of the
imprecise modes for invoking the system floating-point enabled exception error handler is in effect (see
Table 4-25), the invocation of the system floating-point enabled exception error handler is still handled
precisely.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-9
Instruction Model


4.5.1         Boundedly Undefined
If instructions are encoded with incorrectly set bits in reserved fields, or attempt execution with operand
values that are non sequitur for the operation, the results on execution can be said to be “boundedly
undefined.” Boundedly undefined results include any result that is bounded by the current privilege level
in relation to instruction execution and memory accesses. For example, if a user-level program executes
an incorrectly coded instruction, the resulting undefined results are bounded in that a spurious change from
user to supervisor state is not allowed and the level of privilege exercised by the program in relation to
memory access and other system resources cannot be exceeded. Boundedly undefined results for a given
instruction can vary between implementations and between execution attempts in the same
implementation.

4.5.2         Instruction Forms
This section describes preferred instruction forms, addressing modes, and synchronization.

4.5.2.1         Preferred Instruction Forms (no-op)
The OR Immediate (ori) instruction has the following preferred form for expressing a no-op:
   • ori 0,0,0
There are other forms of no-op which produce hints to the processor for improving performance and use
of these hints inappropriately when a true no-op is needed may reduce performance

4.5.2.2         Invalid Instruction Forms
Some of the defined instructions have invalid forms. An instruction form is invalid if one or more fields
of the instruction, excluding the opcode field(s), are coded incorrectly in a manner that can be deduced by
examining only the instruction encoding.
Attempts to execute an invalid form of an instruction either causes an illegal instruction exception or yields
boundedly undefined results. Any exceptions to this rule are stated in the instruction descriptions.
Some kinds of invalid form instructions can be deduced just from examining the instruction layout. These
are listed below.
    • Field shown as reserved but coded as nonzero
    • Field shown as containing a particular value but coded as some other value
These invalid forms are not discussed further.
Other invalid instruction forms can be deduced by detecting an invalid encoding of one or more of the
instruction operand fields. These kinds of invalid form are identified in the instruction descriptions.
    • Branch conditional and branch conditional extended instructions (undefined encoding of BO field)
    • Load with update instructions (rD = rA or rA = 0)
    • Store with update instructions (rA = 0)
    • Load multiple instruction (rA or rB in range of registers to be loaded)
    • Load string immediate instructions (rA in range of registers to be loaded)

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-10                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                  Instruction Model


    •   Load string indexed instructions (rD = rA or rD = rB)
    •   Load/store floating-point with update instructions (rA = 0)

4.5.3        Addressing Modes
This section describes conventions for addressing memory and for calculating effective addresses (EAs).

4.5.3.1        Memory Addressing
A program references memory using the effective address computed by the processor when it executes a
memory access or branch instruction (or certain other instructions described in Section 4.6.1.17.2,
“User-Level Cache Management Instructions,” and Section 4.6.2.2.1, “Supervisor-Level Cache
Management Instructions”) or when it fetches the next sequential instruction.

4.5.3.2        Memory Operands
Bytes in memory are numbered consecutively starting with zero. Each number is the address of the
corresponding byte.
Memory operands may be bytes, half words, words, double words, or, for the load/store multiple load/store
instructions, a sequence of words or bytes. The address of a memory operand is the address of its first byte
(that is, of its lowest-numbered byte). Byte ordering can be big or little endian (see Section 4.5.3.4, “Byte
Ordering”).
Operand length is implicit for each instruction with respect to memory alignment. The operand of a scalar
memory access instruction has a natural alignment boundary equal to the operand length. In other words,
the natural address of an operand is an integral multiple of the operand length. A memory operand is said
to be aligned if it is aligned at its natural boundary; otherwise, it is said to be misaligned. For more
information about alignment, see Section 4.1.2, “Alignment and Misaligned Accesses.”

4.5.3.3        Effective Address Calculation
The address computed by the processor when executing a memory access or branch instruction (or certain
other instructions described in Section 4.6.1.17.2, “User-Level Cache Management Instructions,” and
Section 4.6.2.2, “Supervisor-Level Memory Control Instructions”), or when fetching the next sequential
instruction, is called the effective address (EA) and specifies a byte in memory. For a memory access
instruction, if the sum of the EA and the operand length exceeds the maximum EA, the memory access is
considered to be undefined.
In 32-bit mode, the EA calculation is performed, and the upper 32 bits of the 64-bit EA are ignored and
are treated as zero. In 64-bit mode, the result of the EA calculation is a 64-bit result.
Effective address arithmetic, except for next sequential instruction address computations, wraps around
from the maximum address, 232– 1 in 32-bit mode and 264– 1 in 64-bit mode, to address 0.
For the purposes of describing data and instruction addressing modes, let m = 0 for 64-bit mode and m = 32
for 32-bit mode.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-11
Instruction Model


4.5.3.3.1           Data Memory Addressing Modes
The architecture supports the following data memory addressing modes:
   • Base+displacement addressing mode—The 16-bit D field is sign-extended and added to the
       contents of the GPR designated by rA or to zero if rA = 0. Instructions that use this addressing
       mode are of the D instruction format.
   • Base+index addressing mode—The contents of the GPR designated by rB are added to the
       contents of the GPR designated by rA or to zero if rA = 0. Instructions that use this addressing
       mode are of the X instruction format.
   • Base+displacement extended addressing mode—The 12-bit DE field is sign-extended and added
       to the contents of the GPR designated by rA or to zero if rA = 0. Instructions that use this
       addressing mode are of the DE instruction format.
   • Base+displacement extended scaled addressing mode—The 12-bit DES field is concatenated on
       the right with zeros, sign-extended, and added to the contents of the GPR designated by rA or to
       zero if rA = 0. Instructions that use this addressing mode are of the DES instruction format.
<category VLE>
VLE offers additional instruction formats to provide EA calculation.
Additional extensions to the ISA may provide additional addressing modes.

4.5.3.3.2           Instruction Memory Addressing Modes
Instruction memory addressing modes correspond with instructions forms, as follows:

                                    Table 4-2. Instruction Memory Addressing Modes

          Instruction Form                                    Instruction Memory Addressing Mode

       I-form branch instructions       The 24-bit LI field is concatenated on the right with 0b00, sign-extended, and added
                                        either to the address of the branch instruction if AA = 0, or to 0 if AA = 1.

   Taken B-form branch instructions     The 14-bit BD field is concatenated on the right with 0b00, sign-extended, and added
                                        either to the address of the branch instruction if AA = 0, or to 0 if AA = 1.

  Taken XL-form branch instructions     The contents of bits LR[m–61] or CTR[m–61] are concatenated on the right with 0b00.
                                        The contents of bits LR[m–62] or CTR[m–62] are concatenated on the right with
                                        0b0.<VLE>




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-12                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                Instruction Model


                           Table 4-2. Instruction Memory Addressing Modes (continued)

          Instruction Form                                     Instruction Memory Addressing Mode

  Sequential instruction fetching (or   The value 4 is added to the address of the current instruction to form the EA of the next
   non-taken branch instructions)       instruction. If the address of the current instruction is 0xFFFF_FFFC in 32-bit mode or
                                        0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFC in 64-bit mode, the address of the next sequential
                                        instruction is undefined.

  Any branch instruction with LK = 1    The value 4 is added to the address of the current instruction and the result is placed
                                        into LR. If the address of the current instruction is 0xFFFF_FFFC in 32-bit mode or
                                        0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFC in 64-bit mode, the result placed into LR is undefined.
                                        Although some implementations may support next sequential instruction address
                                        computations wrapping from the highest address to 0 as part of the instruction flow,
                                        depending on this behavior may reduce the portability of their software. If code must
                                        span this boundary, software should place a non-linking branch at address
                                        0xFFFF_FFFC in 32-bit mode or 0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFC in 64-bit mode, which
                                        always branches to address 0 (either absolute or relative branches work).


4.5.3.4         Byte Ordering
If scalars (individual data items and instructions) were indivisible, there would be no such concept as byte
ordering. It is meaningless to consider the order of bits or groups of bits within the smallest addressable
unit of memory, because nothing can be observed about such order. Only when scalars, which the
programmer and processor regard as indivisible quantities, can consist of more than one addressable unit
of memory does the question of order arise.
For a machine in which the smallest addressable unit of memory is the 64-bit double word, there is no
question of the ordering of bytes within double words. All transfers of individual scalars between registers
and memory are of double words, and the address of the byte containing the high-order 8 bits of a scalar
is no different from the address of a byte containing any other part of the scalar.
<category Vector>:
For EIS, a category Vector instruction that accesses memory which is marked as little-endian byte ordering
is undefined.
For the PowerISA, as for most current computer architectures, the smallest addressable unit is the 8-bit
byte. Many scalars are half words, words, and double words that consist of groups of bytes. When a
word-length scalar is stored from a register to memory, the scalar occupies four consecutive byte
addresses. It thus becomes meaningful to discuss the order of the byte addresses with respect to the value
of the scalar: which byte contains the highest-order byte, which contains the next-highest, and so on.
Given a multiple-byte scalar, the choice of ordering is essentially arbitrary. There are 4! = 24 ways to
specify the ordering of four bytes within a word, but only two of these orderings are sensible:
   • Big-endian ordering assigns the lowest address to the highest-order (leftmost) 8 bits of the scalar,
       the next sequential address to the next highest-order 8 bits, and so on. That is, the big
       (most-significant) end of the scalar, considered as a binary number, comes first in memory.
   • Little-endian ordering assigns the lowest address to the lowest-order (rightmost) 8 bits, the next
       sequential address to the next lowest-order 8 bits, and so on. That is, the little (least-significant)
       end of the scalar, considered as a binary number, comes first in memory.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                      4-13
Instruction Model


The byte ordering is configured for each page through the TLBs. See Section 6.5.6, “Permission Attributes,”
and Section 6.4.1, “Memory/Cache Access Attributes (WIMGE Bits).”

4.5.4         Synchronization
Changing a value in certain system registers and invalidating TLB entries can have the side effect of
altering the context in which data addresses and instruction addresses are interpreted, and in which
instructions are executed. For example, changing MSR[IS] from 0 to 1 has the side effect of changing
address space. These effects need not occur in program order (that is, the strict order in which they occur
in the program) and may require explicit synchronization by software.
Context synchronization is achieved by post- and presynchronizing instructions. An instruction is
presynchronized by completing all instructions before dispatching the presynchronized instruction.
Post-synchronizing is implemented by not dispatching any later instructions until the post-synchronized
instruction is completely finished.

4.5.4.1         Memory Synchronization
Memory synchronization means that accesses to memory are properly ordered. Memory accesses may
occur out of order in a weakly ordered memory system and memory synchronization provides a method
to ensure that specified accesses occur in a specified order, or that accesses performed on one processor
are completed before other instructions are initiated which may depend on those memory accesses being
complete (with respect to the processor that is both performing the memory access and which such
memory accesses must appear to complete before other instructions are initiated). Memory
synchronization is performed by the sync and mbar instructions.
The sync 0 instruction provides a memory barrier throughout the memory hierarchy. It waits for preceding
data memory accesses to reach the point of coherency (that is, visible to the entire memory hierarchy); then
it is broadcast. No subsequent instructions in the stream are initiated until after sync 0 completes. Note that
sync 0 uses the same opcode as the previously defined msync instruction. Both msync and sync (no
operand) should be treated as an extended mnemonic for sync 0.
The mbar instruction also provides a memory barrier, but does not guarantee that the storage operations
are complete before other instructions are initiated. Implementations may provide additional operand
values for mbar that provide ordering to a subset of memory accesses. See Section 6.4.8, “Shared
Memory.”
The sync instruction is used to provide ordering of memory accesses and operands other than zero can be
used to perform less stringent (and thus higher performance) ordering. The sync 0 instruction is also used
to ensure that memory access have all been completed on the processor executing the sync 0.
The sync instruction is described in Section 4.6.1.15, “Memory Synchronization Instructions.”
See Section 6.4.8.1, “Memory Access Ordering,” for detailed information.

4.5.4.2         Instruction Synchronization
Instruction synchronization means that instruction fetches to memory occur in the context synchronized
by a context synchronizing instruction; that is, when changes are made to the context in which instructions

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-14                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


are fetched (such as address space), those context changes are not guaranteed to occur until the instructions
are synchronized. Instruction synchronization is performed when a context synchronizing instruction is
executed and completes. Context synchronizing instructions are as follows:
    • sc
    • isync
    • rfi
    • rfgi <E.HV>
    • rfci
    • rfdi <E.ED>
    • rfmci
Implementations may define other instructions as context synchronizing; however, software should not
depend on such behavior if it is expected to run on other implementations.
In general, when executed, a context synchronizing instruction discards previously fetched instructions
(which may have translated or produced other effects in the previously established context), and the
instructions are re-fetched (and retranslated) once the context synchronizing instruction has completed.
Interrupts are also context synchronizing, and begin fetching instructions at the location prescribed by the
interrupt vector.
                                                  CAUTION
                Care must be taken when altering context associated with instruction fetch
                and instruction address translation. Altering MSR[IS], MSR[GS] <E.HV>,
                MSR[CM] <64>, LPIDR <E.HV>, and PIDn can cause an implicit branch,
                where the change in translation or how instructions are fetched causes the
                processor to fetch instructions from a different real address than what would
                have resulted if the context was not changed.
                Even though a single mtmsr instruction can change multiple context bits,
                those bits which are changed can occur individually and in any order until a
                context synchronizing instruction is executed. Implicit branches are not
                supported by the architecture and therefore software must ensure that all
                possible permutations of the previous bits in the MSR and the new bits
                established in the MSR by mtmsr all translate to the same physical address.
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                “Inline” changes, which occur when mtmsr or mtspr is used to change the
                context of an instruction fetch address translation (which affects the current
                instruction stream that is changing the context), are discouraged and should
                be avoided. This is because changes to the address space can cause an
                implicit branch. Use a return from interrupt instruction to atomically change
                both MSR context and execution address.
For more information on SPE load and store instructions, see the SPE PEM. <SPE>




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-15
Instruction Model


4.5.4.2.1           Self-Modifying Code
When a processor modifies any memory location that can contain an instruction, software must ensure that
the instruction cache is made consistent with data memory and that the modifications are made visible to
the instruction fetching mechanism. This must be done even if the cache is disabled or if the page is marked
caching-inhibited.
The following instruction sequence can be used to accomplish this when the instructions being modified
are in memory that is memory-coherence required and one processor both modifies the instructions and
executes them. (Additional synchronization is needed when one processor modifies instructions that
another processor will execute.)
The following sequence synchronizes the instruction stream after software has performed the memory
accesses to store the new instructions. In this sequence, location ‘addr’ is assumed to contain modified
instructions (new instructions)
         dcbst       addr     // Force modified instructions from data cache to memory
                              // -- dcbst must be performed to each cache line containing
                              // new instructions
         sync                 // order dcbst with icbi to ensure data pushed to memory
         icbi        addr     // remove (invalidate) old instructions in instruction cache
                              // -- icbi must be performed to each cache line containing
                              // new instructions
         sync                 // ensure the ICBI invalidate is complete
         isync                // ensure any old prefetched instructions are refetched

These operations are required because the data cache is a write-back cache. Because instruction fetching
uses the instruction cache and the instruction cache is not kept coherent by hardware with the data cache,
changes to items in the data cache cannot be reflected in the instruction cache and the current instruction
pipeline. The dcbst (or dcbf) forces modified cache lines to be written to memory. The subsequent icbi
invalidates the instruction cache lines, removing them from the instruction cache. The isync then removes
any instructions that may have been prefetched and forces them to be refetched. Since the old instructions
were removed from the instruction cache, when the processor fetches instructions they will miss in the
instruction cache and will be loaded from memory. The sync operations ensure the order of the new
instructions being written to memory, the invalidation of the instruction cache, and that the instruction
cache has been invalidated before fetching new instructions.
Special care must be taken to avoid coherency paradoxes in systems that implement unified secondary
caches, and designers should carefully follow the guidelines for maintaining cache coherency discussed in
the user’s manual.
                                      NOTE: Software Considerations
                    Because the optimal instruction sequence may vary between systems, many
                    operating systems provide a system service to perform the function
                    described above.

4.5.4.3          Synchronization Requirements
This section discusses synchronization requirements for special registers, certain instructions, and TLBs.
The synchronization described in this section refers to the state of the processor that is performing the
synchronization.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-16                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                The information in this section describes synchronization requirements at
                an architectural level. More specific information can be found in the core
                reference manual.
An instruction that alters the context in which data addresses or instruction addresses are interpreted, or in
which instructions are executed, is called a context-altering instruction. This section covers all of the
context-altering instructions as well as instructions that require special synchronization. The software
synchronization required for each is shown in Table 4-3, Table 4-4, and Table 4-5. Instructions that are not
listed do not require explicit synchronization.
The notation “CSI” in the tables means any context-synchronizing instruction (sc, isync, rfi, rfgi <E.HV>,
rfci, rfdi <E.ED>, or rfmci). A context-synchronizing interrupt (that is, any interrupt) can be used instead
of a context-synchronizing instruction; if so, references in this section to the synchronizing instruction
should be interpreted as meaning the instruction at which the interrupt occurs. If no software
synchronization is required, either before or after a context-altering instruction, the phrase “the
synchronizing instruction before (or after) the context-altering instruction” should be interpreted as
meaning the context-altering instruction itself.
The synchronizing instruction before the context-altering instruction ensures that all instructions up to and
including that synchronizing instruction are fetched and executed in the context that existed before the
alteration. The synchronizing instruction after the context-altering instruction ensures that all instructions
after that synchronizing instruction are fetched and executed in the context established by the alteration.
Instructions after the first synchronizing instruction, up to and including the second synchronizing
instruction, may be fetched or executed in either context.
If a sequence of instructions contains context-altering instructions and contains no instructions that are
affected by any of the context alterations, no software synchronization is required within the sequence.
No software synchronization is required before altering the MSR because mtmsr is execution
synchronizing.
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                Sometimes advantage can be taken of certain instructions that occur
                naturally in the program, such as the rfi at the end of an interrupt handler,
                which provides the required synchronization.
This table identifies the software synchronization requirements for data access for all context-altering
instructions.

                            Table 4-3. Data Access Synchronization Requirements

     Context Altering Instruction or Event       Required Before               Required After             Notes
                                                                                                            1
mfspr (L1CSR0, L1CSR1)                                sync                          None
mtmsr (CM) <64>                                       None                          CSI                    —
mtmsr (DE)                                            None                          CSI                    —
mtmsr (DS)                                            None                          CSI                    —



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                         4-17
Instruction Model


                        Table 4-3. Data Access Synchronization Requirements (continued)

       Context Altering Instruction or Event             Required Before                    Required After                Notes
mtmsr (GS) <E.HV>                                              None                               CSI                       —
mtmsr (ME)                                                     None                               CSI                       2

mtmsr (PR)                                                     None                               CSI                       —
mtpmr (all)                                                    None                               CSI                       —
mtspr (EPLC) <E.EP>                                            None                               CSI                       —
mtspr (EPSC) <E.EP>                                            None                               CSI                       —
mtspr (L1CSR0, L1CSR1)                                sync followed by isync                     isync                      —
mtspr (L1CSR2)                                        sync followed by isync            isync followed by sync3             —
mtspr (L2CSR0)                                        sync followed by isync                     isync                      —
mtspr (L2CSR1)                                        sync followed by isync            isync followed by sync3             —
mtspr (LPIDR) <E.HV>                                            CSI                               CSI                       —
mtspr (PID, PID1, PID2)                                         CSI                               CSI                       —
tlbivax                                                         CSI                      sync followed by CSI             4,5,6

                                                                                                                            4,5
tlbilx <E.HV>                                                   CSI                               CSI
                                                                                                                            4,5
tlbwe                                                           CSI                               CSI
1
  A sync prior to reading L1CSR0 or L1CSR1 is required to examine any cache locking status from prior cache locking
  operations. The sync ensures that any previous cache locking operations have completed prior to reading the status.
2 A context-synchronizing instruction is required after altering MSR[ME] to ensure that the alteration takes effect for subsequent

  machine check interrupts, which may not be recoverable and therefore may not be context-synchronizing.
3 The additional sync after the mtspr is done is required if software is turning off stashing by setting the stash ID field of the

  register to zero. The sync ensures that any pending stash operations have finished.
4 For data accesses, the context-synchronizing instruction before tlbwe, tlbilx <E.HV>, or tlbivax ensures that all memory

  accesses due to preceding instructions have completed to a point at which they have reported all exceptions they cause.
5 The context-synchronizing instruction after tlbwe, tlbilx <E.HV>, or tlbivax ensures that subsequent accesses (data and

  instruction) use the updated value in any TLB entries affected. It does not ensure that all accesses previously translated by
  TLB entries being updated have completed with respect to memory; if these completions must be ensured, tlbwe, tlbilx
  <E.HV>, or tlbivax must be followed by a sync and by a context-synchronizing instruction.
  The following sequence shows why data accesses must ensure that all storage accesses due to instructions before a tlbwe
  or tlbivax have completed to a point at which they have reported all exceptions they would cause. Assume that valid TLB
  entries exist for the target location when the sequence starts.
  1.A program issues a load or store to a page.
  2. The same program executes a tlbwe or tlbivax that invalidates the corresponding TLB entry.
  3. The load or store instruction finally executes and gets a TLB miss exception that is semantically incorrect. To prevent it, a
     context-synchronizing instruction must be executed between steps 1 and 2.
6 To insure that all TLB invalidations are completed and seen in all processors in the coherence domain, the global invalidation

  requires that a tlbsync be executed after the tlbivax as follows: tlbivax; sync; tlbsync; sync; isync. This code should be
  protected by a mutual exclusion lock such that only one processor at a time is executing this sequence as multiple
  simultaneous tlbsync operations may cause the integrated device to hang.




           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-18                                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                Instruction Model


This table identifies the software synchronization requirements for instruction fetch and/or execution for
context-altering instructions which require synchronization.
                Table 4-4. Instruction Fetch and/or Execution Synchronization Requirements

                Context Altering
                                            Required Before                    Required After                Notes
              Instruction or Event

          mtmsr (CM) <64>                          None                              CSI                       —
          mtmsr (DE)                               None                              CSI                       —
          mtmsr (FE0) <FP>                         None                              CSI                       —
          mtmsr (FE1) <FP>                         None                              CSI                       —
          mtmsr (FP) <FP>                          None                              CSI                       —
          mtmsr (IS)                               None                              CSI                       —
          mtmsr (GS) <E.HV>                        None                              CSI                       —
          mtmsr (PR)                               None                              CSI                       —
          mtpmr (all)                              None                              CSI                       —
          mtspr (L1CSR0, L1CSR1)         sync followed by isync                     isync                      —
          mtspr (L2CSR0, L2CSR1)         sync followed by isync                     isync                      —
          mtspr (LPIDR) <E.HV>                     None                              CSI                       —
          mtspr (MASn)                             None                             isync                      1

          mtspr (PID, PID1, PID2)                  None                              CSI                       —
                                                                                                              2,3
          tlbivax                                  None                              CSI
                                                                                                               2
          tlbilx <E.HV>                            None                              CSI
                                                                                                               2
          tlbwe                                    None                              CSI
          1
            MAS registers changes require an isync before subsequent instructions that use those updated values
            such as a tlbwe, tlbre, tlbilx, tlbsx, tlbilx <E.HV>, and tlbivax. Typically software will do several MAS
            updates and then perform a single isync prior to executing the TLB management instruction.
          2 The context-synchronizing instruction after tlbwe, tlbilx <E.HV>, or tlbivax ensures that subsequent

            accesses (data and instruction) use the updated value in any TLB entries affected. It does not ensure
            that all accesses previously translated by TLB entries being updated have completed with respect to
            memory; if these completions must be ensured, tlbwe, tlbilx <E.HV>, or tlbivax must be followed by
            an sync and by a context-synchronizing instruction.
          3 To ensure that all TLB invalidations are completed and seen in all processors in the coherence domain,

            the global invalidation requires that a tlbsync be executed after the tlbivax as follows: tlbivax; sync;
            tlbsync; sync; isync. This code should be protected by a mutual exclusion lock such that only one
            processor at a time is executing this sequence as multiple simultaneous tlbsync operations may cause
            the integrated device to hang.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                     4-19
Instruction Model


This table identifies the software synchronization requirements for non context-altering instructions that
require synchronization.
                                   Table 4-5. Special Synchronization Requirements

             Context Altering Instruction
                                               Required Before             Required Immediately After         Notes
                      or Event

         mtspr (BUCSR)                               None                             isync                     —
         mtspr (DACn)                                None                   isync followed by changing           1

                                                                               MSR[DE] from 0 to 1
                                                                                                                 1
         mtspr (DBCRn)                               None                   isync followed by changing
                                                                               MSR[DE] from 0 to 1
                                                                                                                 1
         mtspr (DBSR)                                None                   isync followed by changing
                                                                               MSR[DE] from 0 to 1
                                                                                                                 1
         mtspr (DBSRWR) <E.HV>                       None                   isync followed by changing
                                                                               MSR[DE] from 0 to 1
                                                                                                                 1
         mtspr (DVCn)                                None                   isync followed by changing
                                                                               MSR[DE] from 0 to 1
                                                                                                                1,2
         mtspr (EPCR[DUVD]) <E.HV>                   None                   isync followed by changing
                                                                               MSR[DE] from 0 to 1
         mtspr (HIDn)                       msync followed by isync                   isync                     —
         mtspr (IACn)                                None                   isync followed by changing           1

                                                                               MSR[DE] from 0 to 1
         mtspr (L2ERR*)                     msync followed by isync                   isync                     —
         mtspr (MMUCSR0)                             None                             isync                     —
         mtspr (NSPD)                                None                             isync                     —
         1
           Synchronization requirements for changing any debug facility registers require that the changes be followed
           by an isync and a transition of MSR[DE] from 0 to 1 before the results of the changes are guaranteed to be
           seen. Normally changes to the debug registers will occur in the debug interrupt routine when MSR[DE] is 0
           and the subsequent return from the debug routine is likely to set MSR[DE] back to 1, which accomplishes
           the required synchronization. Software should only make changes to the debug facility registers when
           MSR[DE] = 0.
         2
           Note that the special synchronization requirement applies only to changes to EPCR[DUVD]. If this bit is not
           changed, the synchronization requirements for EPCR is as described in the data or instruction execution
           tables above.


4.5.4.4           Context Synchronization
Context-synchronizing operations include instructions isync, sc, rfi, rfgi<E.HV>, rfci, rfdi, and rfmci,
and most interrupts. An instruction or event is context-synchronizing if it satisfies the following
requirements:
   1. The operation is not initiated or, in the case of isync, does not complete until all instructions already
       in execution have completed to a point at which they have reported all exceptions they cause.
   2. The instructions that precede the operation complete execution in the context (including such
       parameters as privilege level, address space, and memory protection) in which they were initiated.




             EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-20                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                  Instruction Model


    3. If the operation is an interrupt or directly causes one (for example, sc directly causes a system call
       interrupt), the operation is not initiated until no interrupt-causing exception exists having higher
       priority than the exception associated with the interrupt. See Section 7.11, “Exception Priorities.”
    4. The sequential execution model requires that instructions after the operation are fetched and
       executed in the context established by the operation. This requirement dictates that any prefetched
       instructions be discarded and that any effects and side effects of executing them speculatively may
       also be discarded, except as described in Section 6.4.8.1, “Memory Access Ordering.”
As described in Section 4.5.4.5, “Execution Synchronization,” a context-synchronizing operation is
necessarily execution synchronizing. Unlike sync and mbar, such operations do not affect the order of
memory accesses with respect to other mechanisms.

4.5.4.5        Execution Synchronization
An instruction is execution synchronizing if it satisfies items 1 and 2 of the definition of context
synchronization (see Section 4.5.4.4, “Context Synchronization”). The sync instruction is treated like
isync with respect to item 1 (that is, the conditions described in item 1 apply to completion of sync).
Execution synchronizing instructions are sync, mtmsr, wrtee, and wrteei. All context-synchronizing
instructions are execution-synchronizing.
Unlike a context-synchronizing operation, an execution-synchronizing instruction need not ensure that the
instructions following it execute in the context established by that execution-synchronizing instruction.
This new context becomes effective after the execution-synchronizing instruction completes and before or
at a subsequent context-synchronizing operation.

4.6        Instruction Summary
Note that some instructions have record and/or overflow forms that have the following features:
   • CR update for integer instructions—The dot (.) suffix on the mnemonic for integer computation
       instructions enables the update of the CR0 field. CR0 is updated based on the signed comparison
       of the result to 0. In 32-bit mode the results of the lower 32-bits of the result are compared to 0. In
       64-bit mode the results of all 64-bits are compared to 0 <64>.
   • Integer overflow option—The o suffix indicates that the overflow bit in the XER is enabled. In
       32-bit mode, overflow (XER[OV]) is set if the carryout of bit 32 is not equal to the carryout of bit
       33 in the final result of the operation. In 64-bit mode, overflow (XER[OV]) is set if the carryout of
       bit 0 is not equal to the carryout of bit 1 in the final result of the operation <64>. Summary overflow
       (XER[SOV]) is a sticky bit that is set when XER[OV] is set.
   • CR update for floating-point instructions—The dot (.) suffix on the mnemonic for floating-point
       computation instructions enables the update of the CR1 field. CR1 is updated with the exception
       status copied from bits FPSCR[32:35]. <FP>
   • CR update for vector instructions—The dot (.) suffix on the mnemonic for vector comparison
       instructions enables the update of the CR6 field. CR6 is updated based on whether the result is all
       zeros or all ones. <V>
   • CR update for store conditional instructions —Store conditional instructions always include the dot
       (.) suffix and update CR0 based on whether the store was performed.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-21
Instruction Model


4.6.1         User-Level Instructions
This section discusses the user-level instructions defined in the architecture.

4.6.1.1         Integer Instructions
This section describes the user-level integer instructions. These consist of the following:
   • Integer arithmetic instructions
   • Integer compare instructions
   • Integer logical instructions
   • Integer rotate and shift instructions
Integer instructions use the content of the GPRs as source operands and place results into GPRs and the
XER and CR fields.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-22                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                  Instruction Model


4.6.1.1.1         Integer Arithmetic Instructions
This table lists the integer arithmetic instructions.

                                    Table 4-6. Integer Arithmetic Instructions

                     Name                                      Mnemonic                        Syntax

    Add                                                  add (add. addo addo.)                 rD,rA,rB
    Add Carrying                                     addc (addc. addco addco.)                 rD,rA,rB
    Add Extended                                     adde (adde. addeo addeo.)                 rD,rA,rB
    Add Immediate                                                 addi                       rD,rA,SIMM
    Add Immediate Carrying                                       addic                       rD,rA,SIMM
    Add Immediate Carrying and Record                            addic.                      rD,rA,SIMM
    Add Immediate Shifted                                        addis                       rD,rA,SIMM
    Add to Minus One Extended                     addme (addme. addmeo addmeo.)                 rD,rA
    Add to Zero Extended                           addze (addze. addzeo addzeo.)                rD,rA
    Divide Doubleword <64>                              divd (divd. divdo divdo.)              rD,rA,rB
    Divide Doubleword Unsigned <64>                 divdu divdu. divduo divduo.                rD,rA,rB
    Divide Word                                         divw (divw. divwo divwo.)              rD,rA,rB
    Divide Word Unsigned                            divwu divwu. divwuo divwuo.                rD,rA,rB
    Multiply High Doubleword <64>                            mulhd (mulhd.)                    rD,rA,rB
    Multiply High Doubleword Unsigned <64>                 mulhdu (mulhdu.)                    rD,rA,rB
    Multiply High Word                                      mulhw (mulhw.)                     rD,rA,rB
    Multiply High Word Unsigned                            mulhwu (mulhwu.)                    rD,rA,rB
    Multiply Low Immediate                                        mulli                      rD,rA,SIMM
    Multiply Low Doubleword <64>                    mulld (mulld. mulldo mulldo.)              rD,rA,rB
    Multiply Low Word                              mullw (mullw. mullwo mullwo.)               rD,rA,rB
    Negate                                               neg (neg. nego nego.)                  rD,rA
    Subtract From                                       subf (subf. subfo subfo.)              rD,rA,rB
    Subtract from Carrying                          subfc (subfc. subfco subfco.)              rD,rA,rB
    Subtract from Extended                          subfe (subfe. subfeo subfeo.)              rD,rA,rB
    Subtract from Immediate Carrying                             subfic                      rD,rA,SIMM
    Subtract from Minus One Extended            subfme (subfme. subfmeo subfmeo.)               rD,rA
    Subtract from Zero Extended                   subfze (subfze. subfzeo subfzeo.)             rD,rA



Although there is no subtract immediate instruction, its effect can be achieved by using an addi instruction
with the immediate operand negated. Simplified mnemonics are provided that include this negation.
Subtract instructions subtract the second operand (rA) from the third operand (rB). Simplified mnemonics
are provided in which the third operand is subtracted from the second. For examples, see Section C.2,
“Subtract Simplified Mnemonics.”


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-23
Instruction Model


An implementation that executes instructions with the overflow exception enable bit (OE) set or that sets
the carry bit (CA) can either execute these instructions slowly or prevent execution of the subsequent
instruction until the operation completes. The summary overflow (SO) and overflow (OV) bits in the XER
are set to reflect an overflow condition of a 32-bit result or a 64-bit result <64> based on computation mode
only if the instruction’s OE bit is set.

4.6.1.1.2           Integer Compare Instructions
Integer compare instructions algebraically or logically compare the contents of register rA with either the
zero-extended value of the UIMM operand, the sign-extended value of the SIMM operand, or the contents
of rB. The comparison is signed for cmpi and cmp and unsigned for cmpli and cmpl.
This table lists integer compare instructions. The L bit can be either 0 (for a 32-bit compare) or 1 (for a
64-bit compare) regardless of the computation mode. Note that the L bit must be 0 for 32-bit
implementations.
                                       Table 4-7. Integer Compare Instructions

                                       Name                Mnemonic           Syntax

                            Compare                           cmp           crD,L,rA,rB
                            Compare Immediate                 cmpi        crD,L,rA,SIMM
                            Compare Logical                   cmpl          crD,L,rA,rB
                            Compare Logical Immediate        cmpli        crD,L,rA,UIMM

The crD operand can be omitted if the result of the comparison is to be placed in CR0; otherwise, the target
CR field must be specified in crD by using an explicit field number.
For information on simplified mnemonics for the integer compare instructions, see Section C.5, “Compare
Word Simplified Mnemonics.”

4.6.1.1.3           Integer Logical Instructions
The logical instructions shown in the following table perform bit-parallel operations on the specified
operands. Logical instructions with the CR updating enabled (uses dot suffix) and instructions andi. and
andis. set CR field CR0 to characterize the result of the logical operation by comparison of the result to 0.
Logical instructions do not affect XER[SO], XER[OV], or XER[CA].

                                        Table 4-8. Integer Logical Instructions

                                          Name                         Mnemonic            Syntax

                    AND                                                and (and.)          rA,rS,rB
                    AND Immediate                                         andi.           rA,rS,UIMM
                    AND Immediate Shifted                                andis.           rA,rS,UIMM
                    AND with Complement                               andc (andc.)         rA,rS,rB
                    Bit Permute Doubleword <64>                         bpermd             rA,rS,rB
                    Compare Bytes                                        cmpb              rA,rS,rB



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-24                                                                                          Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                   Instruction Model


                               Table 4-8. Integer Logical Instructions (continued)

                                        Name                         Mnemonic          Syntax

                Count Leading Zeros Word                          cntlzw (cntlzw.)      rA,rS
                Count Leading Zeros Doubleword <64>                cntlzd (cntlzd.)     rA,rS
                Equivalent                                           eqv (eqv.)        rA,rS,rB
                Extend Sign Byte                                   extsb (extsb.)       rA,rS
                Extend Sign Half Word                              extsh (extsh.)       rA,rS
                Extend Sign Word <64>                              extsw (extsw.)       rA,rS
                NAND                                                nand (nand.)       rA,rS,rB
                NOR                                                  nor (nor.)        rA,rS,rB
                OR                                                     or (or.)        rA,rS,rB
                OR Immediate                                             ori          rA,rS,UIMM
                OR Immediate Shifted                                    oris          rA,rS,UIMM
                OR with Complement                                    orc (orc.)       rA,rS,rB
                Parity Doubleword <64>                                  prtyd           rA,rS
                Parity Word                                            prtyw            rA,rS
                Population Count Byte                                 popcntb           rA,rS
                Population Count Doubleword <64>                      popcntd           rA,rS
                Population Count Word                                 popcntw           rA,rS
                XOR                                                   xor (xor.)       rA,rS,rB
                XOR Immediate                                           xori          rA,rS,UIMM
                XOR Immediate Shifted                                   xoris         rA,rS,UIMM


The ori r0,r0,0 instruction is the preferred form for a no-op.
The or rx,rx,rx instruction is used by the architecture to provide hints to the implementation. See page
5-217.

4.6.1.1.4       Integer Rotate and Shift Instructions
Rotation operations are performed on data from a GPR, and the result, or a portion of the result, is returned
to a GPR. Integer rotate instructions, summarized in the following table, rotate the contents of a register.
The result is either inserted into the target register under control of a mask (if a mask bit is set the
associated bit of the rotated data is placed into the target register, and if the mask bit is cleared the
associated bit in the target register is unchanged) or ANDed with a mask before being placed into the target
register. Section C.3, “Rotate and Shift Simplified Mnemonics,” lists simplified mnemonics that allow
simpler coding of often used functions such as clearing the left- or right-most bits of a register, left or right
justifying an arbitrary field, and simple rotates and shifts.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        4-25
Instruction Model




                                        Table 4-9. Integer Rotate Instructions

                             Name                                  Mnemonic                  Syntax

   Rotate Left Doubleword then Clear Left <64>                    rldcl (rldcl.)          rA,rS,rB,MB
   Rotate Left Doubleword then Clear Right <64>                   rldcr (rldcr.)          rA,rS,rB,ME
   Rotate Left Doubleword Immediate then Clear <64>               rldic (rldic.)          rA,rS,SH,MB
   Rotate Left Doubleword Immediate then Clear Left <64>          rldicl (rldicl.)        rA,rS,SH,MB
   Rotate Left Doubleword Immediate then Clear Right <64>        rldicr (rldicr.)         rA,rS,SH,ME
   Rotate Left Doubleword Immediate then Mask Insert <64>        rldimi(rldimi.)          rA,rS,SH,MB
   Rotate Left Word then AND with Mask                          rlwnm (rlwnm.)           rA,rS,rB,MB,ME
   Rotate Left Word Immediate then Mask Insert                  rlwimi (rlwimi.)        rA,rS,SH,MB,ME
   Rotate Left Word Immediate then AND with Mask                rlwinm (rlwinm.)        rA,rS,SH,MB,ME



The integer shift instructions (Table 4-10) perform left and right shifts. Immediate-form logical (unsigned)
shift operations are obtained by specifying masks and shift values for certain rotate instructions. Simplified
mnemonics (shown in Section C.3, “Rotate and Shift Simplified Mnemonics”) are provided to simplify
coding of such shifts.
Multiple-precision shifts can be programmed as shown in Section D.2, “Multiple-Precision Shifts.” The
integer shift instructions are summarized in this table.

                                        Table 4-10. Integer Shift Instructions

                            Name                              Mnemonic                   Syntax

       Shift Left Doubleword <64>                              sld (sld.)                rA,rS,rB
       Shift Left Word                                        slw (slw.)                 rA,rS,rB
       Shift Right Doubleword <64>                            srd (srd.)                 rA,rS,rB
       Shift Right Word                                       srw (srw.)                 rA,rS,rB
       Shift Right Algebraic Doubleword Immediate <64>       sradi (sradi.)             rA,rS,SH
       Shift Right Algebraic Word Immediate                 srawi (srawi.)              rA,rS,SH
       Shift Right Algebraic Doubleword <64>                 srad(srad.)                 rA,rS,rB
       Shift Right Algebraic Word                            sraw (sraw.)                rA,rS,rB




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-26                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                             Instruction Model


4.6.1.2        Load and Store Instructions
Load and store instructions are issued and translated in program order; however, the accesses can occur
out of order. See Section 6.4.8.1, “Memory Access Ordering.” The following load and store instructions
are defined for user-level:
    • Integer load instructions
    • Integer store instructions
    • Integer load and store with byte-reverse instructions
    • Integer load and store multiple instructions
    • Floating-point load and store instructions <FP>
    • Load and reserve and store conditional instructions
    • Decorated storage load and store instructions <DS>
    • SPE load and store instructions. See the SPE PEM. <SP>
    • AltiVec load and store instructions. See the AltiVec PEM. <V>

4.6.1.2.1        Load and Store Address Generation
Load and store operations generate EAs using register indirect with immediate index mode, register
indirect with index mode, or register indirect mode. Only the low order 32 bits generated EA are used in
32-bit mode. The generate EA is then translated to a real address and the real address is used to perform
the memory access. The different EA calculation modes are described as follows:
    • Register indirect with immediate index addressing for loads and stores. Instructions using this
        addressing mode contain a signed 16-bit immediate index (d operand), which is sign extended and
        added to the contents of a general-purpose register specified in the instruction (rA operand), to
        generate the EA. If r0 is specified, a value of zero is added to the immediate index (d operand) in
        place of the contents of r0. The option to specify rA or 0 is shown in the instruction descriptions
        as (rA|0). The following figure shows how an EA is generated using this mode.
                                                              0            56   1011         15 16                  31
                                      Instruction Encoding:       Opcode     rD/rS      rA               d


                                                              0                           47 48                     63
                                                                     Sign Extension                      d
                                          Yes
                            rA=0?                     0


                                 No
                                                                                              +
     0                                               63       0                                                    63
                           GPR (rA)                                                  Effective Address

     0                                               63              Store               Memory
                  GPR/FPR/VR (rD/rS.frD/frS,vD/vS)                   Load                Interface

               Figure 4-1. Register Indirect with Immediate Index Addressing for Loads/Stores


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                  4-27
Instruction Model


       •       Register indirect with index addressing for loads and stores. Instructions using this mode cause the
               contents of two GPRs (specified as operands rA and rB) to be added in the EA generation. A zero
               in place of the rA operand causes a zero to be added to the GPR contents specified in operand rB.
               The option to specify rA or 0 is shown in the instruction descriptions as (rA|0). The following
               figure shows how an EA is generated using this mode.
                                                                      0        5 6       1011         15 16        20 21       30 31
               Reserved                       Instruction Encoding:       Opcode     rD/rS       rA           rB       Subopcode   /



                                                                      0                                                            63
                                                                                                 GPR (rB)
                                                 Yes
                                   rA=0?                        0


                                        No
                                                                                                       +
           0                                                63        0                                                            63
                                  GPR (rA)                                                   Effective Address


           0                                                63              Store                Memory
                        GPR/FPR/VR (rD/rS.frD/frS,vD/vS)                    Load                 Interface

                            Figure 4-2. Register Indirect with Index Addressing for Loads/Stores

       •       Register indirect addressing for loads and stores. Decorated storage instructions using this
               addressing mode use the contents of the GPR specified by the rB operand as the EA. The rA
               operand contains a decoration value to be used by the targeted device. The following figure shows
               how an EA is generated using this mode.
                                                                      0            5 6   10 11        15 16        20 21       30 31
                Reserved                Instruction Encoding:             Opcode     rD/rS       rA           rB       Subopcode   /



                                                                      0                                                            63
                                                                                                 GPR (rB)


           0                                                    63    0                                                            63
                                  GPR (rA)                                                   Effective Address




                                                                                                 Memory
           0                                                    63          Store                Interface
                           GPR/FPR (rD/rS,frD/frS)                          Load

                             Figure 4-3. Register Indirect Addressing for Integer Loads/Stores

For information about calculating EAs, see Section 4.5.3.3, “Effective Address Calculation.”

               EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-28                                                                                                                Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


                                                   NOTE
                In some implementations, operations that are not naturally aligned can
                suffer performance degradation. See Section 7.8.6, “Alignment Interrupt,”
                for additional information about load and store address alignment interrupts.

4.6.1.2.2       Update Forms of Load and Store Instructions
Many load and store instructions have an update form, in which rA is updated with the generated EA. For
these forms, the EA is placed into rA and the memory element (byte, half word, or word) addressed by the
EA is loaded into rD (load instructions) or stored from rS (store instructions).
For load instructions using the update form if the register specified by rA = 0 or rA = rD, the form is
invalid and the result is boundedly undefined.
For store instructions using the update form if the register specified by rA = 0, the form is invalid and the
result is boundedly undefined.
Not all variations of load and store instructions contain an update form.

4.6.1.2.3       Integer Load Instructions
For integer load instructions, the byte, half-word, word, or double-word addressed by EA is loaded into
the register specified by rD. If the load instruction is an update form, rA is updated with the EA.
This table summarizes the integer load instructions.
                                        Table 4-11. Integer Load Instructions

                                    Name                           Mnemonic         Syntax

             Load Byte and Zero                                       lbz           rD,d(rA)
             Load Byte and Zero Indexed                               lbzx         rD,rA,rB
             Load Byte and Zero with Update                           lbzu          rD,d(rA)
             Load Byte and Zero with Update Indexed                  lbzux         rD,rA,rB
             Load Doubleword <64>                                      ld           rD,d(rA)
             Load Doubleword Indexed <64>                             ldx          rD,rA,rB
             Load Doubleword with Update <64>                         ldu           rD,d(rA)
             Load Doubleword with Update Indexed <64>                ldux          rD,rA,rB
             Load Half Word and Zero                                  lhz           rD,d(rA)
             Load Half Word and Zero Indexed                          lhzx         rD,rA,rB
             Load Half Word and Zero with Update                      lhzu          rD,d(rA)
             Load Half Word and Zero with Update Indexed             lhzux         rD,rA,rB
             Load Half Word Algebraic                                 lha           rD,d(rA)
             Load Half Word Algebraic Indexed                         lhax         rD,rA,rB
             Load Half Word Algebraic with Update                    lhau           rD,d(rA)
             Load Half Word Algebraic with Update Indexed            lhaux         rD,rA,rB



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-29
Instruction Model


                                   Table 4-11. Integer Load Instructions (continued)

                                         Name                       Mnemonic              Syntax

               Load Word and Zero                                       lwz              rD,d(rA)
               Load Word and Zero Indexed                              lwzx              rD,rA,rB
               Load Word and Zero with Update                          lwzu              rD,d(rA)
               Load Word and Zero with Update Indexed                  lwzux             rD,rA,rB
               Load Word Algebraic <64>                                 lwa              rD,d(rA)
               Load Word Algebraic Indexed <64>                        lwax              rD,rA,rB
               Load Word Algebraic with Update Indexed <64>            lwaux             rD,rA,rB

                                       NOTE: Software Considerations
                    Some implementations may execute the load algebraic (lha, lhax, lhau,
                    lhaux, lwa <64>, lwax <64>, lwaux <64>) instructions with greater latency
                    than other types of load instructions.

4.6.1.2.4           Integer Store Instructions
For integer store instructions, the rS contents are stored into the byte, half word, word or double-word in
memory addressed by the EA. If the store instruction is an update form, rA is updated with the EA.
This table summarizes integer store instructions.
                                         Table 4-12. Integer Store Instructions

                                         Name                     Mnemonic             Syntax

                    Store Byte                                        stb              rS,d(rA)

                    Store Byte Indexed                               stbx              rS,rA,rB

                    Store Byte with Update                           stbu              rS,d(rA)

                    Store Byte with Update Indexed                   stbux             rS,rA,rB

                    Store Doubleword <64>                             std              rS,d(rA)

                    Store Doubleword Indexed <64>                    stdx              rS,rA,rB

                    Store Doubleword with Update <64>                stdu              rS,d(rA)

                    Store Doubleword with Update Indexed <64>        stdux             rS,rA,rB

                    Store Half Word                                   sth              rS,d(rA)

                    Store Half Word Indexed                          sthx              rS,rA,rB

                    Store Half Word with Update                      sthu              rS,d(rA)

                    Store Half Word with Update Indexed              sthux             rS,rA,rB

                    Store Word                                        stw              rS,d(rA)

                    Store Word Indexed                               stwx              rS,rA,rB




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-30                                                                                              Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


                              Table 4-12. Integer Store Instructions (continued)

                                    Name                       Mnemonic            Syntax

                Store Word with Update                            stwu            rS,d(rA)

                Store Word with Update Indexed                   stwux           rS,rA,rB


4.6.1.2.5       Integer Load and Store with Byte-Reverse Instructions
The following table describes integer load and store with byte-reverse instructions. For integer load with
byte-reverse instructions, the byte, half-word, word, or double-word addressed by EA is byte-reversed and
loaded into the register specified by rD. For integer store with byte-reverse instructions, the rS contents
are byte-reversed then stored into the byte, half word, word or double-word in memory addressed by the
EA.
These instructions were defined in part to support the original PowerPC definition of little-endian byte
ordering. Note that the EIS supports true little endian on a per-page basis. For more information, see
Section 4.5.3.4, “Byte Ordering.”
                     Table 4-13. Integer Load and Store with Byte-Reverse Instructions

                                     Name                       Mnemonic           Syntax

                 Load Doubleword Byte-Reverse Indexed <64>         ldbrx           rD,rA,rB

                 Load Half Word Byte-Reverse Indexed               lhbrx           rD,rA,rB

                 Load Word Byte-Reverse Indexed                    lwbrx           rD,rA,rB

                 Store Doubleword Byte-Reverse Indexed <64>       stdbrx           rD,rA,rB

                 Store Half Word Byte-Reverse Indexed             sthbrx           rS,rA,rB

                 Store Word Byte-Reverse Indexed                  stwbrx           rS,rA,rB


4.6.1.2.6       Integer Load and Store Multiple Instructions
The load/store multiple instructions, listed in Table 4-14, move blocks of data to and from the GPRs. If
their operands require memory accesses crossing a page boundary, these instructions may require a data
storage interrupt or a data TLB error interrupt to translate the second page. Also, if one of these instructions
is interrupted, it will be restarted, requiring multiple memory accesses.
The architecture defines the lmw instruction with rA in the range of registers to be loaded as an invalid
form.
Load and store multiple accesses must be word aligned; otherwise, they cause an alignment exception.
                          Table 4-14. Integer Load and Store Multiple Instructions

                                    Name           Mnemonic          Syntax

                             Load Multiple Word         lmw          rD,d(rA)

                             Store Multiple Word        stmw         rS,d(rA)




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-31
Instruction Model


4.6.1.2.7           Floating-Point Load and Store Instructions <FP>
There are two forms of floating-point load and store instructions—single-precision (word) and
double-precision (double-word) operand formats. FPRs are 64-bits and operate on 64-bit floating point
values. When a single precision (word) value is loaded into a FPR, the single-precision value is converted
to a double-precision (64-bit) format. Conversely, when a single precision (word) value is stored from an
FPR to memory, the double-precision value is converted to a single-precision (32-bit) format then stored
to memory.
For floating-point load single instructions, the word addressed by EA is interpreted as a floating-point
single precision operand and is converted to floating-point double format then loaded into the register
specified by frD. The conversion process is as follows, where WORD0:31 is the floating-point
single-precision operand accessed from memory:
    Normalized Operand
     if WORD1:8 > 0 and WORD1:8 < 255 then
       FPR(frD)0:1 ← WORD0:1
         FPR(frD)2 ← ¬WORD1
         FPR(frD)3 ← ¬WORD1
         FPR(frD)4 ← ¬WORD1
         FPR(frD)5:63 ← WORD2:31 || 290
    Denormalized Operand
    if WORD1:8 = 0 and WORD9:31 ≠ 0 then
       sign ← WORD0
       exp ← -126
       frac0:52 ← 0b0 || WORD9:31 || 290
       normalize the operand
            do while frac0 = 0
                frac ← frac1:52 || 0b0
                exp ← exp - 1
       FPR(frD)0 ← sign
       FPR(frD)1:11 ← exp + 1023
       FPR(frD)12:63 ← frac1:52
    Zero/Infinity/NaN
    if WORD1:8 = 255 or WORD1:31 = 0 then
       FPR(frD)0:1 ← WORD0:1
       FPR(frD)2 ← WORD1
       FPR(frD)3 ← WORD1
       FPR(frD)4 ← WORD1
       FPR(frD)5:63 ← WORD2:31 || 290

For floating-point store single instructions (except stfiwx), the frS contents are converted to a single
precision format then stored into the word in memory addressed by EA. The conversion steps are as
follows, where WORD0:31 is the word in memory written to:
    No Denormalization Required (includes Zero / Infinity / NaN)
    if FPR(FRS)1:11 > 896 or FPR(FRS)1:63 = 0 then
       WORD0:1 ← FPR(FRS)0:1
       WORD2:31 ← FPR(FRS)5:34
    Denormalization Required
    if 874 ≤ FRS1:11 ≤ 896 then
       sign ← FPR(FRS)0
       exp ← FPR(FRS)1:11 – 1023
       frac ← 0b1 || FPR(FRS)12:63
       denormalize operand
            do while exp < –126


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-32                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model

               frac ← 0b0 || frac0:62
               exp ← exp + 1
      WORD0 ← sign
      WORD1:8 ← 0x00
      WORD9:31 ← frac1:23
   else WORD ← undefined

When a floating-point store single operation occurs, the value in the FPR is converted to single precision
and may require denormalization. If the value in the FPR is smaller in precision than is representable in
single-precision format a signed zero value is stored. If the value in the FPR is larger in magnitude than is
representable, the value stored is computed as follows (assuming that FPR is a double-precision
representation of the value in frS):
   WORD ← FPR0:1 || FPR5:34

In this case, the value stored in memory is not numerically equal to the value in the FPR that was stored.
The stfiwx instruction stores the low-order 32 bits of frS without conversion into the word in memory
addressed by EA.
                                   NOTE: Software Considerations
                The stfiwx instruction is useful only for storing the contents of the FPSCR
                after it has been moved to an FPR.
For floating-point load double instructions, the double-word addressed by EA is loaded into the register
specified by frD. For floating-point store double instructions, the frS contents are stored into the
double-word in memory addressed by EA. No conversion is required when loading or storing
floating-point doubles as the data is copied directly to or from the FPR.
If the load or store instruction is an update form, rA is updated with the EA.
Attempted execution of a floating-point load or store instruction causes a floating-point unavailable
interrupt if MSR[FP] = 0.
This table summarizes the floating-point load and store instructions.
                             Table 4-15. Floating-Point Load and Store Instructions

                                      Name                      Mnemonic           Syntax

               Load Floating-Point Single                           lfs           frD,d(rA)

               Load Floating-Point Single Indexed                  lfsx           frD,rA,rB

               Load Floating-Point Single with Update              lfsu           frD,d(rA)

               Load Floating-Point Single with Update Indexed      lfsux          frD,rA,rB

               Load Floating-Point Double                           lfd           frD,d(rA)

               Load Floating-Point Double Indexed                  lfdx           frD,rA,rB

               Load Floating-Point Double with Update              lfdu           frD,d(rA)

               Load Floating-Point Double with Update Indexed      lfdux          frD,rA,rB

               Store Floating-Point Single                         stfs           frS,d(rA)

               Store Floating-Point Single Indexed                 stfsx          frS,rA,rB



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-33
Instruction Model


                          Table 4-15. Floating-Point Load and Store Instructions (continued)

                                           Name                       Mnemonic       Syntax

                    Store Floating-Point Single with Update             stfsu       frS,d(rA)

                    Store Floating-Point Single with Update Indexed    stfsux       frS,rA,rB

                    Store Floating-Point Double                         stfd        frS,d(rA)

                    Store Floating-Point Double Indexed                 stfdx       frS,rA,rB

                    Store Floating-Point Double with Update             stfdu       frS,d(rA)

                    Store Floating-Point Double with Update Indexed    stfdux       frS,rA,rB

                    Store Floating-Point as Integer Word Indexed       stfiwx       frS,rA,rB

                                       NOTE: Software Considerations
                     Because no conversion occurs on loading and storing floating-point double
                     precision memory locations, load floating double and store floating double
                     can be used to copy memory contents efficiently using 64-bit accesses on a
                     32-bit implementation.

4.6.1.2.8            Load and Reserve and Store Conditional Instructions
Load and reserve and store conditional instructions are used to perform atomic operations on memory,
particularly in a multiprocessor shared memory environment. Load and reserve instructions load data into
a GPR and establish a reservation held by the processor. Store conditional instructions store to memory
only if a previous reservation exists and is still valid. CR0 is updated based on whether the store was
performed or not.
Reservations are based on real addresses, and can only be established by load and reserve instructions.
Reservations are lost (become invalid) if another load and reservation is performed by the same processor
to a different address (establishes a new reservation), or another processor or device modifies (perform a
store) the address previously established by the load and reserve instruction. Reservations can be lost for
other reasons as well.
Load and reserve and store conditional instructions can be used to emulate semaphore operations such as
test and set, compare and swap, atomic update, exchange memory, and so on, along with simple lock
semantics. For a more in depth discussion see Section 6.4.8, “Shared Memory.”
Although reservations are based on the coherency granule, load and reserve and store conditional sizes and
addresses must match for a store conditional to be guaranteed to succeed. Mixing sizes (for example,
lwarx with stdcx. <64>) or mixing addresses within an implementation’s coherency granule (for example,
ldarx <64> to 0x100000 and stwcx. to 0x100024 on a processor with a coherency granule of x040), may
succeed on one implementation but fail on another.
Execution of a load and reserve or store conditional instruction to a misaligned address causes an
alignment interrupt.
The memory attributes allowed for load and reserve and store conditional instructions are implementation
dependent. Execution of a load and reserve or store conditional instruction to an address that is not


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-34                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                     Instruction Model


Memory Coherence Required, or is Write Through Required or Caching Inhibited, may cause a data
storage interrupt. See the core reference manual.
This table lists the load and reserve and store conditional instructions.
                      Table 4-16. Load and Reserve and Store Conditional Instructions

                     Name                     Mnemonic    Syntax                         Notes

Load Byte and Reserve Indexed <ER>               lbarx    rD,rA,rB Should be paired with a later stbcx. to the same
                                                                   real address.
Load Doubleword and Reserve Indexed <64>         ldarx    rD,rA,rB Should be paired with a later stdcx. to the same
                                                                   real address.
Load Halfword and Reserve Indexed <ER>           lharx    rD,rA,rB Should be paired with a later sthcx. to the same
                                                                   real address.
Load Word and Reserve Indexed                    lwarx    rD,rA,rB Should be paired with a later stwcx. to the same
                                                                   real address.
Store Byte Conditional Indexed <ER>             stbcx.    rS,rA,rB Should be paired with a previous lbarx to the same
                                                                   real address.
Store Doubleword Conditional Indexed <64>       stdcx.    rS,rA,rB Should be paired with a previous ldarx to the same
                                                                   real address.
Store Halfword Conditional Indexed <ER>         sthcx.    rS,rA,rB Should be paired with a previous lharx to the same
                                                                   real address.
Store Word Conditional Indexed                  stwcx.    rS,rA,rB Should be paired with a previous lwarx to the same
                                                                   real address.


4.6.1.2.9       Decorated Load and Store Instructions <DS>
Decorated load and store instructions provide load and store operations to memory addresses (integrated
device-specific) that have additional semantics available other than the customary load (read) and store
(write). A “decoration” is additional semantic information applied to the decorated storage operation. The
contents of rA specify the decoration. The contents of rB specify the address. The decoration is delivered
with the address and data size to the device associated with the memory address. For decorated store
instructions the contents of rS is also sent. The device performs device-specific semantics using the
decoration, address, size, and store data (for decorated store instructions) and returns load data that is
placed in rD (for decorated load instructions). The number of bits of decoration that are delivered to the
target address is implementation specific.
Decorated storage also provides a “notify” instruction, dsn. A notify is a type of access that is neither load
or store because it does not provide a data value (store) and does not receive a data value (load). A notify
sends the decoration with the address to the device associated with the memory address. The device uses
the decoration to determine the semantic operation.
Decorated load and store operations behave the same as loads and stores with respect to all other aspects
of load and store operations provided by the processor for translation, access control, debug events, storage
attributes, alignment, and memory access ordering. A decorated notify operation is treated as a store with
respect to these same attributes.
Additionally, some implementations require write permissions for decorated load instructions performed
to memory that is Caching Inhibited.

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                          4-35
Instruction Model


Decorated storage operations to memory that are Caching Inhibited are treated as Guarded regardless of
the setting of the Guarded memory attribute.
Decorated storage operations to memory, other than dsn, that are not Caching Inhibited are treated the
same as the corresponding non-decorated storage operations, except that an implementation-specific
performance hint may be provided by the decoration. A dsn to memory that is not Caching Inhibited
should be treated as a no-op.
A decorated load or store to a device that does not support decorations is boundedly undefined. A non
decorated load or store to a device that requires decorations is boundedly undefined.
Decorated load and store instructions allow efficient, device-specific operations targeted by storage
address, such as packet-counting statistics. The target device defines specific semantics understood by a
customized resource that requires them. As such, EIS only defines the instruction semantics as defined by
the processor. To determine the full semantic of a decorated storage operation, consult the reference
manual for the integrated device.
                                        NOTE: Software Considerations
                    •   Software must be acutely aware of the effects of operations defined by
                        the decorations supplied and must ensure that the processor only issues
                        operations appropriately. This will generally require the addresses to be
                        marked as Guarded and Caching Inhibited and appropriate memory
                        barriers are used to ensure order.
                    •   Software should ensure that accesses are aligned, otherwise atomic
                        accesses are not guaranteed and may require multiple accesses to
                        perform the operation which is likely not to produce the intended result.
This table lists the decorated storage load and store instructions.

                                 Table 4-17. Decorated Load and Store Instructions

                                            Instruction                        Mnemonic    Syntax

                Load Byte with Decoration Indexed                                lbdx     rD,rA,rB

                Load Half Word with Decoration Indexed                           lhdx     rD,rA,rB

                Load Word with Decoration Indexed                                lwdx     rD,rA,rB

                Load Doubleword with Decoration Indexed <64>                     lddx     rD,rA,rB

                Load Floating-Point Doubleword with Decoration Indexed <FP>      lfddx    frD,rA,rB

                Store Byte with Decoration Indexed                               stbdx    rS,rA,rB

                Store Half Word with Decoration Indexed                          sthdx    rS,rA,rB

                Store Word with Decoration Indexed                              stwdx     rS,rA,rB

                Store Doubleword with Decoration Indexed <64>                    stddx    rS,rA,rB

                Store Floating-Point Doubleword with Decoration Indexed <FP>    stfddx    frS,rA,rB

                Decorated Storage Notify                                         dsn        rA,rB



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-36                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                  Instruction Model


4.6.1.3        Floating-Point Instructions <FP>
This section describes the floating-point instructions other than the floating-point load and store
instructions, which are defined in Section 4.6.1.2.7, “Floating-Point Load and Store Instructions <FP>.”
The EIS provides for hardware implementation of a floating-point system as defined in ANSI/IEEE
Standard 754-1985, IEEE Standard for Binary Floating Point Arithmetic. For detailed information about
the floating-point data formats, see Section 3.4.3, “Floating-Point Data.”
The IEEE Std. 754 includes 64- and 32-bit arithmetic. The standard requires that single-precision
arithmetic be provided for single-precision operands. The standard permits double-precision arithmetic
instructions to have either (or both) single-precision or double-precision operands, but states that
single-precision arithmetic instructions should not accept double-precision operands.
The EIS follows these guidelines:
   • Double-precision arithmetic instructions may have single-precision operands but always produce
      double-precision results.
   • Single-precision arithmetic instructions require all operands to be single-precision and always
      produce single-precision results.
For arithmetic instructions, conversions from double- to single-precision must be done explicitly by
software, while conversions from single- to double-precision are done implicitly.
To ensure that identical results are obtained, all PowerISA implementations provide the equivalent of the
execution models described in this chapter. The definition of the arithmetic instructions for infinities,
denormalized numbers, and NaNs follow conventions described in Section 3.4.3, “Floating-Point Data”
and the following sections.
Although the double-precision format specifies an 11-bit exponent, exponent arithmetic uses two
additional bit positions to avoid potential transient overflow conditions. An extra bit is required when
denormalized double-precision numbers are prenormalized. A second bit is required to permit
computation of the adjusted exponent value in the following examples when the corresponding exception
enable bit is one:
   • Underflow during multiplication using a denormalized factor
   • Overflow during division using a denormalized divisor

4.6.1.3.1        Floating-Point Move Instructions
Described in the following table, floating-point move instructions copy data from one FPR to another,
altering the sign bit (bit 0) as described below for fneg, fabs, and fnabs. These instructions treat NaNs just
like any other kind of value (for example, the sign bit of a NaN may be altered by fneg, fabs, fcpsign, and
fnabs). These instructions do not alter the FPSCR.
                                 Table 4-18. Floating-Point Move Instructions

                                      Instruction           Mnemonic        Syntax

                            Floating Absolute Value            fabs[.]      frD,frB
                            Floating Absolute Value          fcpsign[.]     frD,frB



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-37
Instruction Model


                               Table 4-18. Floating-Point Move Instructions (continued)

                                            Instruction            Mnemonic               Syntax

                                Floating Move Register               fmr[.]               frD,frB
                                Floating Negative Absolute Value    fnabs[.]              frD,frB
                                Floating Negate                      fneg[.]              frD,frB

                                       NOTE: Software Considerations
                    Many processors that implement category Floating-point, do not implement
                    the fcpsign instruction. This is because this instruction was not
                    implemented in early PowerPC processors. Software should consult their
                    core reference manual and be wary that this instruction may not be
                    implemented on other cores.

4.6.1.3.2           Floating-Point Arithmetic Instructions
This table lists mnemonics and syntax of floating-point arithmetic instructions.
                                   Table 4-19. Floating-Point Arithmetic Instructions

                                              Instruction                      Mnemonic             Syntax

                        Floating Add                                            fadd[.]         frD,frA,frB
                        Floating Add Single                                     fadds[.]        frD,frA,frB
                        Floating Divide                                          fdiv[.]        frD,frA,frB
                        Floating Divide Single                                  fdivs[.]        frD,frA,frB
                        Floating Multiply                                       fmul[.]         frD,frA,frC
                        Floating Multiply Single                                fmuls[.]        frD,frA,frC
                        Floating Reciprocal Estimate                             fre[.]             frD,frB
                        Floating Reciprocal Estimate Single                      fres[.]            frD,frB
                        Floating Reciprocal Square Root Estimate               frsqrte[.]           frD,frB
                        Floating Reciprocal Square Root Estimate Single        frsqrtes[.]          frD,frB
                        Floating Square Root                                    fsqrt[.]            frD,frB
                        Floating Square Root Single                             fsqrts[.]           frD,frB
                        Floating Test for software Divide                       ftdiv[.]        crD,frA,frB
                        Floating Test for software Square Root                  ftdiv[.]            crD,frB
                        Floating Subtract                                       fsub[.]         frD,frA,frB
                        Floating Subtract Single                                fsubs[.]        frD,frA,frB

                                        NOTE: Software Considerations
                    Many processors that implement category Floating-point, do not implement
                    the fre, fsqrt, fsqrts, ftdiv, ftsqrt, or frsqrtes instructions. This is because
                    such instructions were not implemented in early PowerPC processors.
                    Software should consult their core reference manual and be wary that all or
                    some of these may not be implemented on other cores.

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-38                                                                                                          Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                           Instruction Model


4.6.1.3.3        Floating-Point Multiply-Add Instructions
These instructions combine a multiply and an add operation without an intermediate rounding operation.
FPSCR status bits, described in Table 4-20 are set as follows:
   • Overflow, underflow, and inexact exception bits, the FR, FI, and FPRF fields are set based on the
       final result of the operation, not on the result of the multiplication.
   • Invalid operation exception bits are set as if the multiplication and the addition were performed
       using two separate instructions (fmul[s], followed by fadd[s] or fsub[s]). That is, any of the
       following actions will cause appropriate exception bits to be set:
       — Multiplication of infinity by 0
       — Multiplication of anything by an SNaN
       — Addition of anything with an SNaN
                                Table 4-20. Floating-Point Multiply-Add Instructions

                                         Instruction                   Mnemonic      Instruction

                          Floating Multiply-Add                         fmadd[.]    frD,frA,frB,frC

                          Floating Multiply-Add Single                 fmadds[.]    frD,frA,frB,frC

                          Floating Multiply-Subtract                    fmsub[.]    frD,frA,frB,frC

                          Floating Multiply-Subtract Single            fmsubs[.]    frD,frA,frB,frC

                          Floating Negative Multiply-Add               fnmadd[.]    frD,frA,frB,frC

                          Floating Negative Multiply-Add Single        fnmadds[.]   frD,frA,frB,frC

                          Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract          fnmsub[.]    frD,frA,frB,frC

                          Floating Negative Multiply-Subtract Single   fnmsubs[.]   frD,frA,frB,frC


4.6.1.4        Floating-Point Rounding and Conversion Instructions
Examples of uses of these instructions to perform various conversions can be found in Section D.3,
“Floating-Point Conversions <FP>.”
This table lists floating-point rounding and conversion instructions.
                       Table 4-21. Floating-Point Rounding and Conversion Instructions

                                           Instruction                                       Mnemonic      Syntax

       Floating Convert from Integer Double Word                                               fcfid[.]    frD,frB

       Floating Convert from Integer Double Word Single                                       fcfids[.]    frD,frB

       Floating Convert from Integer Double Word Unsigned                                     fcfidu[.]    frD,frB

       Floating Convert from Integer Double Word Unsigned Single                              fcfidus[.]   frD,frB

       Floating Convert to Integer Double Word                                                 fctid[.]    frD,frB

       Floating Convert to Integer Double Word Unsigned                                       fctidu[.]    frD,frB

       Floating Convert to Integer Double Word Unsigned and round toward Zero                 fctiduz[.]   frD,frB




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                4-39
Instruction Model


                    Table 4-21. Floating-Point Rounding and Conversion Instructions (continued)

                                             Instruction                               Mnemonic       Syntax

        Floating Convert to Integer Double word and round toward Zero                   fctidz[.]     frD,frB

        Floating Convert to Integer Word                                                fctiw[.]      frD,frB

        Floating Convert to Integer Word Unsigned                                       fctiwu[.]     frD,frB

        Floating Convert to Integer Word Unsigned and Round to Zero                    fctiwuz[.]     frD,frB

        Floating Convert to Integer Word and Round to Zero                              fctiwz[.]     frD,frB

        Floating Round to Integer Minus                                                  frim[.]      frD,frB

        Floating Round to Integer Nearest                                                frin[.]      frD,frB

        Floating Round to Integer Plus                                                   frip[.]      frD,frB

        Floating Round to Integer Toward Zero                                            friz[.]      frD,frB

        Floating Round to Single-Precision                                               frsp[.]      frD,frB

                                         NOTE: Software Considerations
                    Many processors that implement category Floating-point, do not implement
                    the fcfid, fcfids, fcfidu, fcfidus, fctid, fctidu, fctiduz, fctidz, fctiwu,
                    fctiwuz, frim, frin, frip, or friz instructions. This is because such
                    instructions were not implemented in early PowerPC processors. Software
                    should consult their core reference manual and be wary that all or some of
                    these may not be implemented on other cores.

4.6.1.5         Floating-Point Compare Instructions
The floating-point compare instructions compare the contents of two FPRs. Comparison ignores the sign
of zero (that is, regards +0 as equal to –0). The comparison result can be ordered or unordered. The
comparison sets one bit in the designated CR field and clears the other three. The floating-point condition
code, FPSCR[FPCC], is set in the same way.
The CR field and the FPCC are set as described in this table.
                                                 Table 4-22. CR Field Settings

                                             Bit Name              Description

                                             0      FL     (frA) < (frB)

                                             1     FG      (frA) > (frB)

                                             2      FE     (frA) = (frB)

                                             3      FU     (frA) ? (frB) (unordered)




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-40                                                                                           Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                  Instruction Model


The floating-point compare and select instruction set is shown in this table.
                          Table 4-23. Floating-Point Compare and Select Instructions

                                    Instruction           Mnemonic              Syntax

                            Floating Compare Ordered       fcmpo              crD,frA,frB
                            Floating Compare Unordered     fcmpu              crD,frA,frB
                            Floating Select                 fsel[.]          frD,frA,frB,frC


4.6.1.6        Floating-Point Status and Control Register Instructions
Every FPSCR instruction synchronizes the effects of all floating-point instructions executed by a given
processor. Executing an FPSCR instruction ensures that all floating-point instructions previously initiated
by the processor complete before the FPSCR instruction is initiated and that no subsequent floating-point
instructions are initiated by the processor until the FPSCR instruction completes.
    • All exceptions caused by the previously initiated instructions are recorded in the FPSCR before the
        FPSCR instruction is initiated.
    • All invocations of floating-point enabled exception-type program interrupt that is caused by the
        previously initiated instructions have occurred before the FPSCR instruction is initiated.
    • No subsequent floating-point instruction that depends on or alters FPSCR bits begins until the
        FPSCR instruction completes.
Floating-point load and floating-point store instructions are not affected.
                      Table 4-24. Floating-Point Status and Control Register Instructions

                                    Instruction             Mnemonic                Syntax

                          Move from FPSCR                   mffs, mffs.               frD

                          Move to FPSCR Bit 0             mtfsb0, mtfsb0.            crbD

                          Move to FPSCR Bit 1             mtfsb1, mtfsb1.            crbD

                          Move to FPSCR Fields             mtfsf, mtfsf.            FM,frB

                          Move to FPSCR Field Immediate    mtfsfi, mtfsfi.         crD,IMM


4.6.1.7        Floating-Point Exceptions
This architecture defines the following floating-point exceptions:
   • Invalid operation exception
       — SNaN
       — Infinity-infinity
       — Infinity÷Infinity
       — Zero÷Zero
       — Infinity×Zero
       — Invalid compare


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-41
Instruction Model


           — Software-defined condition
           — Invalid square root
           — Invalid integer convert
       •   Zero-divide exception
       •   Overflow exception
       •   Underflow exception
       •   Inexact exception
These exceptions, other than invalid operation exceptions due to a software-defined condition, may occur
during execution of computational instructions. An invalid operation exception due to a software-defined
condition occurs when a Move to FPSCR instruction sets FPSCR[VXSOFT].
Each floating-point exception, and each category of invalid operation exception, has an exception bit in
the FPSCR. In addition, each floating-point exception has a corresponding enable bit in the FPSCR. The
exception bit indicates occurrence of the corresponding exception. If an exception occurs, the
corresponding enable bit governs the result produced by the instruction and, in conjunction with the FE0
and FE1 bits (see Table 4-25), whether and how the system floating-point enabled exception error handler
is invoked. (In general, the enabling specified by the enable bit is of invoking the system error handler, not
of permitting the exception to occur. The occurrence of an exception depends only on the instruction and
its inputs, not on the setting of any control bits. The only deviation from this general rule is that the
occurrence of an underflow exception may depend on the setting of the enable bit.)
A single instruction, other than mtfsfi or mtfsf, may set multiple exception bits only in the following cases:
    • Inexact exceptions may be set with overflow exception.
    • Inexact exceptions may be set with underflow exception.
    • Invalid operation exceptions (SNaN) are set with invalid operation exception (∞×0) for
       multiply-add instructions for which the values being multiplied are infinity and zero and the value
       being added is an SNaN.
    • Invalid operation exceptions (SNaN) may be set with invalid operation exception (invalid
       compare) for compare ordered instructions.
    • Invalid operation exceptions (SNaN) may be set with invalid operation exception (invalid integer
       convert) for convert to integer instructions.
When an exception occurs, the writing of a result to the target register may be suppressed or a result may
be delivered, depending on the exception.
The writing of a result to the target register is suppressed for the following kinds of exception, so that there
is no possibility that one of the operands is lost:
    • Enabled invalid operation
    • Enabled zero divide
For the remaining kinds of exception, a result is generated and written to the destination specified by the
instruction causing the exception. The result may be a different value for the enabled and disabled
conditions for some of these exceptions. The kinds of exception that deliver a result are the following:
    • Disabled invalid operation

           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-42                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


    •   Disabled zero divide
    •   Disabled overflow
    •   Disabled underflow
    •   Disabled inexact
    •   Enabled overflow
    •   Enabled underflow
    •   Enabled inexact
Subsequent sections define each of the floating-point exceptions and specify the action that is taken when
they are detected.
IEEE Std. 754 specifies the handling of exceptional conditions in terms of “traps” and “trap handlers.” In
this architecture, an FPSCR exception enable bit of 1 causes generation of the result value specified in the
IEEE Std. 754 for the trap-enabled case; software is expected to detect the exception and revise the result.
An FPSCR exception enable bit of 0 causes generation of the default-result value specified for the
trap-disabled (or no-trap-occurs or trap-not-implemented) case; the expectation is that the exception is not
detected by software, which uses the default result. The result delivered in each case, for each exception,
is described in the following sections.
When an exception occurs, the IEEE Std. 754 default behavior is to generate a default value without
notifying software. In this architecture, this behavior is desired for all exceptions; all FPSCR exception
enable bits should be cleared and ignore exceptions mode (see below) should be used. In this case, the
floating-point enabled exception error handler is not invoked, even if floating-point exceptions occur;
software can inspect the FPSCR exception bits to determine whether exceptions occurred.
In this architecture, if software is to be notified that a given kind of exception occurred, the corresponding
FPSCR enable bit must be set and a mode other than ignore exceptions mode must be used. In this case,
the system floating-point enabled exception error handler is invoked if an enabled floating-point exception
occurs. The system floating-point enabled exception error handler is also invoked if a move to FPSCR
instruction causes an exception bit and the corresponding enable bit both to be 1; the move to FPSCR
instruction is considered to cause the enabled exception.
MSR[FE0,FE1] control whether and how the system floating-point enabled exception error handler is
invoked if an enabled floating-point exception occurs. In EIS, only precise mode is supported and if
MSR[FE0,FE1] are non-zero, precise mode is used. (The system floating-point enabled exception error
handler is never invoked because of a disabled floating-point exception.) PowerISA defines settings for
MSR[FE0,FE1] that include imprecise modes which are not implemented by EIS.
The effects of the four possible settings of these bits in Power ISA are described in this table.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-43
Instruction Model


                            Table 4-25. Power ISA FE0 and FE1 Configuration Descriptions

FE0 FE1                                                           Description

  0     0     Ignore exceptions mode. Floating-point exceptions do not cause the system floating-point enabled exception error
              handler to be invoked.

  0     1     Imprecise nonrecoverable mode. The system floating-point enabled exception error handler is invoked at some
              point at or beyond the instruction that caused the enabled exception. It may not be possible to identify the excepting
              instruction or the data that caused the exception. Results produced by the excepting instruction may have been
              used by or may have affected subsequent instructions that are executed before the error handler is invoked.

              EIS treats this setting to be the same as precise mode.

  1     0     Imprecise recoverable mode. The system floating-point enabled exception error handler is invoked at some point at
              or beyond the instruction that caused the enabled exception. Sufficient information is provided to the error handler
              that it can identify the excepting instruction and the operands, and correct the result. No results produced by the
              excepting instruction have been used by or have affected subsequent instructions that are executed before the error
              handler is invoked.

              EIS treats this setting to be the same as precise mode.

  1     1     Precise mode. The system floating-point enabled exception error handler is invoked precisely at the instruction that
              caused the enabled exception.

In all cases, the question of whether a floating-point result is stored, and what value is stored, is governed
by the FPSCR exception enable bits, as described in subsequent sections, and is not affected by the value
of the FE0 and FE1 bits.
In all cases in which the system floating-point enabled exception error handler is invoked, all instructions
before the instruction at which the system floating-point enabled exception error handler is invoked have
completed, and no instruction after the instruction at which the system floating-point enabled exception
error handler is invoked has begun execution. The instruction at which the floating-point enabled program
exception error handler is invoked has completed if it is the excepting instruction and there is only one
such instruction. Otherwise it has not begun execution (or may have been partially executed in some cases,
as described in Section 7.8.7, “Program Interrupt”).
                                        NOTE: Software Considerations
                    •   In any nonprecise mode, an FPSCR instruction can be used to force any
                        exceptions, due to instructions initiated before the FPSCR instruction, to
                        be recorded in the FPSCR. (This forcing is superfluous for precise
                        mode.)
                    •   In either imprecise mode, an FPSCR instruction can be used to force any
                        invocations of the system floating-point enabled exception error
                        handler, due to previously initiated instructions, to occur. (This has no
                        effect in ignore exceptions mode and is superfluous for precise mode.)
                    •   The last sentence of the paragraph preceding this note applies only for
                        imprecise modes or if the mode has been changed from ignore
                        exceptions mode. (It always applies in the latter case.)




            EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-44                                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


For best performance across the widest range of implementations, follow these guidelines:
   • If the IEEE-754 default results are acceptable to the application, use ignore exceptions mode with
       all FPSCR exception enable bits cleared.
   • If the IEEE-754 default results are not acceptable, use imprecise nonrecoverable mode (or
       imprecise recoverable mode if recoverability is needed) with FPSCR exception enable bits set for
       those exceptions that would invoke the system floating-point enabled exception error handler.
   • Ignore exceptions mode should not, in general, be used if any FPSCR exception enable bits are set.
   • Precise mode may degrade performance in some implementations, perhaps substantially, and
       therefore should be used only for debugging and other specialized applications.
                                   NOTE: Software Considerations
                In general, most processors implement a precise recoverable mode for FE0,
                FE1 regardless of whether it is set to use an imprecise mode. Consult the
                core reference manual.

4.6.1.7.1       Invalid Operation Exception
An invalid operation exception occurs when an operand is invalid for one the following operations:
   • Any floating-point operation on a Signaling NaN (SNaN)
   • For add or subtract operations, magnitude subtraction of infinities (∞ - ∞)
   • Division of infinity by infinity (∞ ÷ ∞)
   • Division of zero by zero (0 ÷ 0)
   • Multiplication of infinity by zero (∞ × 0)
   • Ordered comparison involving a NaN (invalid compare)
   • Square root or reciprocal square root of a negative (and nonzero) number (invalid square root)
   • Integer convert involving a number too large in magnitude to be represented in the target format,
       or involving an infinity or a NaN (invalid integer convert)
An invalid operation exception also occurs when an mtfsfi, mtfsf, or mtfsb1 executes that sets
FPSCR[VXSOFT] (software-defined condition).
The action to be taken depends on the setting of the invalid operation exception enable bit of the FPSCR.
When an invalid operation exception is enabled (FPSCR[VE]=1) and an invalid operation exception
occurs, the following actions are taken:
   1. One or two invalid operation exceptions are set
        FPSCR[VXSNAN]                           (if SNaN)
        FPSCR[VXISI]                            (if ∞ - ∞)
        FPSCR[VXIDI]                            (if ∞ ÷ ∞)
        FPSCR[VXZDZ]                            (if 0 ÷ 0)
        FPSCR[VXIMZ]                            (if ∞ × 0)
        FPSCR[VXVC]                             (if invalid comparison)
        FPSCR[VXSOFT]                           (if software-defined condition)

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-45
Instruction Model


          FPSCR[VXSQRT]                               (if invalid square root)
          FPSCR[VXCVI]                                (if invalid integer convert)
       2. If the operation is an arithmetic, floating round to single-precision, floating round to integer, or
          convert to integer operation, the following occurs:
          — The target FPR is unchanged
          — FPSCR[FR,FI] are cleared
          — FPSCR[FPRF] is unchanged
       3. If the operation is a compare, the following occurs:
          — FPSCR[FR,FI,C] are unchanged
          — FPSCR[FPCC] is set to reflect unordered
       4. If an mtfsfi, mtfsf, or mtfsb1 instruction is executed that sets FPSCR[VXSOFT], the FPSCR is set
          as specified in the instruction description.
When an invalid operation exception is disabled (FPSCR[VE]=0) and an invalid operation exception
occurs, the following actions are taken:
   1. One or two invalid operation exceptions are set:
        FPSCR[VXSNAN]                              (if SNaN)
        FPSCR[VXISI]                               (if ∞ - ∞)
        FPSCR[VXIDI]                               (if ∞ ÷ ∞)
        FPSCR[VXZDZ]                               (if 0 ÷ 0)
        FPSCR[VXIMZ]                               (if ∞ × 0)
        FPSCR[VXVC]                                (if invalid comparison)
        FPSCR[VXSOFT]                              (if software-defined condition)
        FPSCR[VXSQRT]                              (if invalid square root)
        FPSCR[VXCVI]                               (if invalid integer convert)
   2. If the operation is an arithmetic or floating round to single-precision operation,
        — the target FPR is set to a Quiet NaN.
        — FPSCR[FR, FI] are cleared.
        — FPSCR[FPRF] is set to indicate the class of the result (Quiet NaN).
   3. If the operation is a convert to 64-bit integer operation, the target FPR is set as follows:
        — frD is set to the most positive 64-bit integer if the operand in frB is a positive number or + ∞,
            and to the most negative 64-bit integer if the operand in frB is a negative number, - ∞, or NaN.
        — FPSCR[FR, FI] are cleared.
        — FPSCR[FPRF] is undefined.
   4. If the operation is a convert to 32-bit integer operation, the target FPR is set as follows:
        — frD0:31 I undefined
            frD32:63 are set to the most positive 32-bit integer if the operand in frB is a positive number or
            +infinity, and to the most negative 32-bit integer if the operand in frB is a negative number,
            -infinity, or NaN


           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-46                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


       — FPSCR[FR, FI] are cleared.
       — FPSCR[FPRF] is undefined.
    5. If the operation is a compare, then
       — FPSCR[FR, FI, C] are unchanged.
       — FPSCR[FPCC] is set to reflect unordered.
    6. If an mtfsfi, mtfsf, or mtfsb1 instruction is executed that sets FPSCR[VXSOFT], FPSCR is set as
       specified in the instruction description.

4.6.1.7.2       Zero Divide Exception
A zero divide exception occurs when a divide instruction is executed with a zero divisor value and a finite
nonzero dividend value. It also occurs when a reciprocal estimate instruction (fre[s] or frsqrte[s]) is
executed with an operand value of zero.
The action to be taken depends on the setting of the zero divide exception enable bit, FPSCR[ZE]. If
FPSCR[ZE]=1 and a zero divide exception occurs, the following actions are taken:
   1. Zero divide exception is set: FPSCR[ZX] = 1.
   2. The target FPR is unchanged; FPSCR[FR, FI] are cleared.
   3. FPSCR[FPRF] is unchanged.
When zero divide exception is disabled (FPSCR[ZE]=0) and a zero divide exception occurs, the following
actions are taken:
    1. Zero divide exception is set; FPSCR[ZX] 1.
    2. The target FPR is set to ± Infinity, where the sign is determined by the XOR of the signs of the
        operands.
    3. FPSCR[FR,FI] are cleared.
    4. FPSCR[FPRF] is set to indicate the class and sign of the result (± Infinity).

4.6.1.7.3       Overflow Exception
An overflow exception occurs when the magnitude of what would have been the rounded result if the
exponent range were unbounded exceeds that of the largest finite number of the specified result precision.
The action taken depends on the setting of the overflow exception enable bit of the FPSCR.
When overflow exception is enabled (FPSCR[OE]=1) and an overflow exception occurs, the following
actions are taken:
    1. Overflow exception is set: FPSCR[OX] =1.
    2. For double-precision arithmetic instructions, the exponent of the normalized intermediate result is
        adjusted by subtracting 1536.
    3. For single-precision arithmetic instructions and the floating round to single-precision instruction,
        the exponent of the normalized intermediate result is adjusted by subtracting 192.
    4. The adjusted rounded result is placed into the target FPR.
    5. FPSCR[FPRF] is set to indicate the class and sign of the result (± Normal Number).


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-47
Instruction Model


When overflow exception is disabled (FPSCR[OE]=0) and an overflow exception occurs, the following
actions are taken:
    1. Overflow exception is set: FPSCR[OX] = 1.
    2. Inexact exception is set: FPSCR[XX] = 1.
    3. The result is determined by the rounding mode (FPSCR[RN]) and the sign of the intermediate
        result as follows:
        — Round to Nearest
            Store ± Infinity, where the sign is the sign of the intermediate result.
        — Round toward Zero
            Store the format’s largest finite number with the sign of the intermediate result.
        — Round toward + Infinity
            For negative overflow, store the format’s most negative finite number; for positive overflow,
            store +Infinity.
        — Round toward -Infinity
            For negative overflow, store -Infinity; for positive overflow, store the format’s largest finite
            number.
    4. The result is placed into the target FPR.
    5. FPSCR[FR] is undefined.
    6. FPSCR[FI] is set.
    7. FPSCR[FPRF] is set to indicate the class and sign of the result (± Infinity or ± Normal Number).

4.6.1.7.4           Underflow Exception
Underflow exception is defined separately for the enabled and disabled states:
   • Enabled: Underflow occurs when the intermediate result is “Tiny.”
   • Disabled: Underflow occurs when the intermediate result is “Tiny” and there is “Loss of
       Accuracy.”
A “Tiny” result is detected before rounding, when a nonzero intermediate result computed as though both
the precision and the exponent range were unbounded would be less in magnitude than the smallest
normalized number.
If the intermediate result is “Tiny” and the underflow exception is disabled (FPSCR[UE]=0) then the
intermediate result is denormalized (see Section 3.4.3.4, “Normalization and Denormalization”) and
rounded (see Section 3.4.3.6, “Rounding”) before being placed into the target FPR.
“Loss of Accuracy” is detected when the delivered result value differs from what would have been
computed were both the precision and the exponent range unbounded.
The action to be taken depends on the setting of the underflow exception enable bit of the FPSCR.
When underflow exception is enabled (FPSCR[UE]=1) and an underflow exception occurs, the following
actions are taken:
    1. Underflow exception is set: FPSCR[UX] = 1.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-48                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


    2. For double-precision arithmetic instructions, the exponent of the normalized intermediate result is
       adjusted by adding 1536.
    3. For single-precision arithmetic instructions and the floating round to single-precision instruction,
       the exponent of the normalized intermediate result is adjusted by adding 192.
    4. The adjusted rounded result is placed into the target FPR.
    5. FPSCR[FPRF] is set to indicate the class and sign of the result (± Normalized Number).
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                The FR and FI bits are provided to allow the system floating-point enabled
                exception error handler, when invoked because of an underflow exception,
                to simulate a “trap disabled” environment. That is, the FR and FI bits allow
                the system floating-point enabled exception error handler to unround the
                result, thus allowing the result to be denormalized.
When underflow exception is disabled (FPSCR[UE]=0) and an underflow exception occurs, the following
actions are taken:
    1. Underflow exception is set. FPSCR[UX] = 1.
    2. The rounded result is placed into the target FPR.
    3. FPSCR[FPRF] is set to indicate the class and sign of the result (± Normalized Number, ±
        Denormalized Number, or ± Zero).

4.6.1.7.5       Inexact Exception
An inexact exception occurs when one of two conditions occur during rounding:
   • The rounded result differs from the intermediate result assuming both the precision and the
       exponent range of the intermediate result to be unbounded. In this case the result is said to be
       inexact. (If the rounding causes an enabled overflow exception or an enabled underflow exception,
       an inexact exception also occurs only if the significands of the rounded result and the intermediate
       result differ.)
   • The rounded result overflows and overflow exception is disabled.
The action to be taken does not depend on the setting of the inexact exception enable bit of the FPSCR.
When an inexact exception occurs, the following actions are taken:
  1. Inexact exception is set: FPSCR[XX] = 1.
  2. The rounded or overflowed result is placed into the target FPR.
  3. FPSCR[FPRF] is set to indicate the class and sign of the result.
                                NOTE: Software Considerations
                In some implementations, enabling inexact exceptions may degrade
                performance more than does enabling other types of floating-point
                exception.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-49
Instruction Model


4.6.1.8         Branch and Flow Control Instructions
Some branch instructions can redirect instruction execution conditionally, based on the value of bits in the
CR.

4.6.1.8.1           Branch Instruction Address Calculation
Branch instructions can alter the sequence of instruction execution. Instruction addresses are always
assumed to be word-aligned; processors ignore the two low-order bits of the generated branch target
address.
<Category VLE>:
Instruction addresses are assumed to be half-word aligned; processors ignore the low-order bit of the
generated branch target address.
Branch instructions compute the EA of the next instruction address using the following addressing modes:
   • Branch relative
   • Branch conditional to relative address
   • Branch to absolute address
   • Branch conditional to absolute address
   • Branch conditional to link register (LR)
   • Branch conditional to count register (CTR)

4.6.1.8.2           Branch Relative Addressing Mode
Instructions that use branch relative addressing generate the next instruction address by sign extending and
appending 0b00 to the immediate displacement operand LI, and adding the resultant value to the current
instruction address. Branches using this mode have the absolute addressing option disabled (AA field, bit
30, in the instruction encoding = 0). The LR update option can be enabled (LK field, bit 31, in the
instruction encoding = 1). This causes the EA of the instruction following the branch instruction to be
placed in the LR.
This figure shows how the branch target address is generated using this mode.
                                     0           5 6                                             29 30 31
             Instruction Encoding:        18                                  LI                     AA LK


                                     0           37 38                                           61 62 63
                                     Sign Extension                           LI                     0 0


                       0                                   63
                             Current Instruction Address                 +
                                     0                                                                     63
         Reserved                                               Branch Target Address

                                         Figure 4-4. Branch Relative Addressing


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-50                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                      Instruction Model


4.6.1.8.3         Branch Conditional to Relative Addressing Mode
If branch conditions are met, instructions that use the branch conditional to relative addressing mode
generate the next instruction address by sign extending and appending results to the immediate
displacement operand (BD) and adding the resultant value to the current instruction address. Branches
using this mode have the absolute addressing option disabled (AA field, bit 30, in the instruction
encoding = 0). The LR update option can be enabled (LK field, bit 31, in the instruction encoding = 1).
This option causes the EA of the instruction following the branch instruction to be placed in the LR.
This figure shows how the branch target address is generated using this mode.
                               0            5 6     1011            15 16                30 31
      Instruction Encoding:          16           BO          BI            BD        AA LK               Reserved


                                                                                     0                                      63
                                                                            No
                                                               Condition                  Next Sequential Instruction Address
                                                                Met?

                                                              Yes
                               0                                47 48              61 62 63
                                          Sign Extension                    BD           0 0

       0                                               63
                Current Instruction Address                          +
                              0                                                            63
                                                    Branch Target Address

                                    Figure 4-5. Branch Conditional Relative Addressing

4.6.1.8.4         Branch to Absolute Addressing Mode
Instructions that use branch to absolute addressing mode generate the next instruction address by sign
extending and appending 0b00 to the LI operand. Branches using this addressing mode have the absolute
addressing option enabled (AA field, bit 30, in the instruction encoding = 1). The LR update option can be
enabled (LK field, bit 31, in the instruction encoding = 1). This option causes the EA of the instruction
following the branch instruction to be placed in the LR.
This figure shows how the branch target address is generated using this mode.
                                       0                    5 6                                                       29 30 31
            Instruction Encoding:              18                                          LI                             AA LK

                                       0                    37 38                                                     61 62 63
                                       Sign Extension                                      LI                              0 0

                                       0                                                                              61 62 63
                                                                            Branch Target Address                          0 0

                                           Figure 4-6. Branch to Absolute Addressing


           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                           4-51
Instruction Model


4.6.1.8.5           Branch Conditional to Absolute Addressing Mode
If the branch conditions are met, instructions that use the branch conditional to absolute addressing mode
generate the next instruction address by sign extending and appending 0b00 to the BD operand. Branches
using this addressing mode have the absolute addressing option enabled (AA field, bit 30, in the instruction
encoding = 1). The LR update option can be enabled (bit 31 (LK) in the instruction encoding = 1). This
option causes the EA of the instruction following the branch instruction to be placed in the LR.
This figure shows how the branch target address is generated using this mode.
                                0        5 6      1011        15 16                     29 30 31
       Instruction Encoding:        16           BO      BI                 BD            AA LK

                                                                                          0                                             63
                                                                        No
                                                           Condition                              Next Sequential Instruction Address
                                                            Met?

                                                                 Yes
                                0                           47 48                       61 62 63
                                      Sign Extension                        BD                0 0

                                0                                                       61 62 63
                                             Branch Target Address                            0     0

                                 Figure 4-7. Branch Conditional to Absolute Addressing

4.6.1.8.6           Branch Conditional to Link Register Addressing Mode
If the branch conditions are met, the branch conditional to LR instruction generates the next instruction
address by fetching the contents of the LR and clearing the two low-order bits to zero. The LR update
option can be enabled (LK field, bit 31, in the instruction encoding = 1). This option causes the EA of the
instruction following the branch instruction to be placed in the LR.
This figure shows how the branch target address is generated using this mode.
                                         0            5 6       10 11 15 16             20 21            30 31
                Instruction Encoding:            19           BO       BI     00000                 16      LK            Reserved


                                                                                             0                                          63
                                                                                        No
                                                                       Condition                   Next Sequential Instruction Address
                                                                        Met?

                                                                                  Yes
       0                                              61                                                  62 63
                               LR                                            ||                            0 0

                                             0                                                                63
                                                                Branch Target Address

                               Figure 4-8. Branch Conditional to Link Register Addressing



           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-52                                                                                                                  Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                        Instruction Model


4.6.1.8.7        Branch Conditional to Count Register Addressing Mode
If the branch conditions are met, the branch conditional to count register instruction generates the next
instruction address by fetching the contents of the count register (CTR) and clearing the two low-order bits
to zero. The LR update option can be enabled (LK field, bit 31, in the instruction encoding = 1). This
option causes the EA of the instruction following the branch instruction to be placed in the LR.
This figure shows how the branch target address is generated when using this mode.
                                            0        5 6    1011        15 16       20 21            30 31
                    Instruction Encoding:       19         BO      BI         00000            528     LK            Reserved


                                                                                           0                                     63
                                                                                      No
                                                                   Condition                   Next Sequential Instruction Address
                                                                    Met?

      0                                              61                       Yes                    62 63
                             CTR                                         ||                          0 0

                                            0                                                          63
                                                            Branch Target Address

                           Figure 4-9. Branch Conditional to Count Register Addressing


4.6.1.9        Conditional Branch Control
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                 Some processors do not implement the static branch prediction defined in
                 the architecture and described here. Consult the core reference manual.
For branch conditional instructions, the BO operand specifies the conditions under which the branch is
taken. The first four bits of the BO operand specify how the branch is affected by or affects the condition
and count registers. The fifth bit, shown in Table 4-26 as having the value t, is used by some
implementations for branch prediction as described below.
                                                Figure 4-10. BO Bit Descriptions

             BO Bits                                            Description

                0       Setting this bit causes the CR bit to be ignored.

                1       Bit value to test against

                2       Setting this causes the decrement to not be decremented.

                3       Setting this bit reverses the sense of the CTR test.

                4       Used for the t bit, which provides a hint about whether a conditional branch is likely to be
                        taken and may be used by some implementations to improve performance.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                               4-53
Instruction Model


The encodings for the BO operands are shown in this table.
                                             Table 4-26. BO Operand Encodings

                BO                                                   Description

               0000z      Decrement the CTR, then branch if the decremented CTR ≠ 0 and the condition is FALSE.

               0001z      Decrement the CTR, then branch if the decremented CTR = 0 and the condition is FALSE.

               001at      Branch if the condition is FALSE.

               0100z      Decrement the CTR, then branch if the decremented CTR ≠ 0 and the condition is TRUE.

               0101z      Decrement the CTR, then branch if the decremented CTR = 0 and the condition is TRUE.

               011at      Branch if the condition is TRUE.

               1a00t      Decrement the CTR, then branch if the decremented CTR ≠ 0.

               1a01t      Decrement the CTR, then branch if the decremented CTR = 0.

               1z1zz      Branch always.

              In this table, z indicates a bit that is ignored. Note that the z bits should be cleared, as they may be
              assigned a meaning in some future version of the architecture.
              The a and t bits provides a hint about whether a conditional branch is likely to be taken and may be
              used by some implementations to improve performance.

The a and t bits of the BO field can be used by software to provide a hint about whether the branch is likely
to be taken or is likely not to be taken as shown in this table:

                                                  Table 4-27. at Bit Encodings

                                       at                               Hint

                                      00          No hint is given

                                      01          Reserved

                                      10          The branch is very likely not to be taken

                                      11          The branch is very likely to be taken


For bclr[l] and bcctr[l] instructions, the BH field provides a hint about the use of the instruction as shown
in this table:

                                                Table 4-28. BH Field Encodings

                               BH           Instruction                         Hint

                                              bclr[l]     The instruction is a subroutine return

                                             bcctr[l]     The instruction is not a subroutine return; the
                               00                         target address is likely to be the same as the
                                                          target address used the preceding time the
                                                          branch was taken




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-54                                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                   Instruction Model


                                 Table 4-28. BH Field Encodings (continued)

                           BH      Instruction                         Hint

                                      bclr[l]    The instruction is not a subroutine return; the
                                                 target address is likely to be the same as the
                           01                    target address used the preceding time the
                                                 branch was taken

                                     bcctr[l]    Reserved

                           10      Reserved

                           11         bclr[l]    The target address is not predictable

                           11        bcctr[l]    The target address is not predictable

The hint provided by the BH field is independent of the hint provided by the at bits.
                                   NOTE: Software Considerations
                Many processors have dynamic methods of predicting whether a branch will
                be taken or not. Some processors maintain a “link stack” to dynamically
                predict subroutine calls. Since the dynamic prediction is likely to be very
                accurate, such implementations will generally ignore static branch
                prediction hints.
                                           NOTE: Architecture
                Previous versions of the architecture (going back to the original PowerPC
                architecture), used a “y” bit as the 5th bit of the BO field for static branch
                prediction. The “at” method is backward compatible with software that used
                the old method.
The 5-bit BI operand in branch conditional instructions specifies which CR bit represents the condition to
test. The CR bit selected is BI +32, as shown in Table 3-13.
If the branch instructions contain immediate addressing operands, the target addresses can be computed
sufficiently ahead of the branch instruction that instructions can be fetched along the target path. If the
branch instructions use the link and count registers, instructions along the target path can be fetched if the
link or count register is loaded sufficiently ahead of the branch instruction.
Branching can be conditional or unconditional, and optionally a branch return address is created by storing
the EA of the instruction following the branch instruction in the LR after the branch target address has been
computed. This is done regardless of whether the branch is taken.

4.6.1.9.1       Using a Link Register Stack
Some processors may keep a stack of the LR values most recently set by branch and link instructions, with
the possible exception of the form shown below for obtaining the address of the next instruction. To benefit
from this stack, the following programming conventions should be used.
In the following examples, let A, B, and Glue represent subroutine labels:



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        4-55
Instruction Model


       •   Obtaining the address of the next instruction—use the following form of branch and link:
           bcl 20,31,$+4
       •   Loop counts:
           Keep them in the count register, and use one of the branch conditional instructions to decrement
           the count and to control branching (for example, branching back to the start of a loop if the
           decremented counter value is nonzero).
       •   Computed GOTOs, case statements, and so on:
           Use the count register to hold the address to branch to, and use the bcctr instruction with the link
           register option disabled (LK = 0) and BH = 0b11 if appropriate, to branch to the selected address.
       •   Direct subroutine linkage—where A calls B and B returns to A. The two branches should be as
           follows:
           — A calls B: use a branch instruction that enables the link register (LK = 1).
           — B returns to A: use the bclr instruction with the link register option disabled (LK = 0) (the
               return address is in, or can be restored to, the link register).
       •   Indirect subroutine linkage:
           Where A calls Glue, Glue calls B, and B returns to A rather than to Glue. (Such a calling sequence
           is common in linkage code used when the subroutine that the programmer wants to call, here B, is
           in a different module from the caller: the binder inserts “glue” code to mediate the branch.) The
           three branches should be as follows:
           — A calls Glue: use a branch instruction that sets the link register with the link register option
               enabled (LK = 1).
           — Glue calls B: place the address of B in the count register, and use the bcctr instruction with the
               link register option disabled (LK = 0).
           — B returns to A: use the bclr instruction with the link register option disabled (LK = 0) (the
               return address is in, or can be restored to, the link register).

4.6.1.9.2           Branch Instructions
This table lists branch instructions. A set of simplified mnemonics and symbols is provided for the most
frequently used forms of branch conditional, compare, trap, rotate and shift, and certain other instructions.
See Section C.4, “Branch Instruction Simplified Mnemonics.”
                                             Table 4-29. Branch Instructions

                                       Name                       Mnemonic            Syntax

                        Branch                                   b (ba bl bla)      target_addr

                        Branch Conditional                     bc (bca bcl bcla) BO,BI,target_addr

                        Branch Conditional to Link Register       bclr (bclrl)        BO,BI

                        Branch Conditional to Count Register    bcctr (bcctrl)        BO,BI




           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-56                                                                                              Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                  Instruction Model


                                                    NOTE
                The Integer Select instruction, isel, can be used to handle sequences with
                multiple conditional branches more efficiently. A detailed description
                including syntax and an example of how isel can be used can be found
                Section 4.6.1.9.5, “Integer Select Instruction.”

4.6.1.9.3       Condition Register (CR) Logical Instructions
CR logical instructions, shown in the following table, and the Move Condition Register Field (mcrf)
instruction are also defined as flow control instructions.
                                Table 4-30. Condition Register Logical Instructions

                                           Name                    Mnemonic         Syntax

                          Condition Register AND                         crand   crbD,crbA,crbB

                          Condition Register OR                          cror    crbD,crbA,crbB

                          Condition Register XOR                         crxor   crbD,crbA,crbB

                          Condition Register NAND                    crnand      crbD,crbA,crbB

                          Condition Register NOR                         crnor   crbD,crbA,crbB

                          Condition Register Equivalent                  creqv   crbD,crbA,crbB

                          Condition Register AND with Complement     crandc      crbD,crbA,crbB

                          Condition Register OR with Complement          crorc   crbD,crbA,crbB

                          Move Condition Register Field                  mcrf       crD,crfS


4.6.1.9.4       Trap Instructions
The trap instructions, shown in the following table, test for a specified set of conditions. If any of the
conditions tested by a trap instruction are met, a trap type program interrupt is taken. For more information,
see Section 7.8.7, “Program Interrupt.” If the tested conditions are not met, instruction execution continues
normally. See Appendix C, “Simplified Mnemonics.”
                                             Table 4-31. Trap Instructions

                                    Name                     Mnemonic                  Syntax

                Trap Doubleword Immediate <64>                     tdi               TO,rA,SIMM

                Trap Doubleword <64>                               td                 TO,rA,rB

                Trap Word Immediate                                twi               TO,rA,SIMM

                Trap Word                                          tw                 TO,rA,rB


4.6.1.9.5       Integer Select Instruction
The Integer Select instruction, isel, shown in the following table, is a conditional register move that helps
eliminate short branches often found in control code, which is common in embedded applications, is



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-57
Instruction Model


characterized by unpredictable short branches. When mispredicted, such branches cause long pipeline
delays.
                                      Table 4-32. Integer Select Instruction

                                        Name           Mnemonic        Syntax

                                   Integer Select        isel       rD,rA,rB,crB

The isel instruction can be used to handle short conditional branch segments more efficiently. It uses two
source registers and one destination register. Under the control of a specified condition code bit, it copies
one or the other source operand to the destination, as follows:
if crB then
         rD = rA
else
         rD = rB

The isel instruction allows more efficient implementation of a condition sequence such as the one in the
following generic example:
int16 global1,…, global37,...;
....
void procedure17(int16 parm) {
   if (global1 == 27) {
       global37 = parm + 17;
   }
   else {
       global37 = parm - 17;
   }
}

This table shows a coding example with and without the isel instruction.
                                          Table 4-33. Recoding with isel

                          Code Sequence without isel                 Code Sequence with isel

                    cmpi cr3, r17, 27;                          cmpi cr3, r17, 27;
                    bne cr3, NotEqual;                          addi r15, r17, 17;
                    addi r15, r17, 17;                          addi r16, r17, -17;
                    jmp Assign;                                 isel r15, r15, r16, cr3.eq
                    NotEqual:                                   stw r15, (rGlobals + g37);
                         addi r15, r17, -17;
                    Assign:
                         stw r15, (rGlobals + g37);

The sequence without isel turns conditional branches into a code sequence that sets a condition code
according to the results of a computation. It uses a conditional branch to choose a target sequence, but
needs an unconditional branch for the IF clause. The conditional branch is often hard to predict, the code
sequences are generally small, and the resulting throughput is typically low.
The sequence using isel does the following:
   • Sets a condition code according to the results of a comparison
   • Has code that executes both the IF and the ELSE segments
   • Copies the results of one segment to the desired destination register


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-58                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


    •   Works well for small code segments and for unpredictable branches
    •   Can reduce code size

4.6.1.10      System Linkage Instruction
The System Call (sc) instruction permits a program to call on the system to perform a service or an
operating system to call on the hypervisor to perform a service. Table 4-34 lists the system linkage
instruction. Executing sc with LEV = 0, produces a normal system call to the operating system. Executing
sc with LEV = 1 should be used by operating systems to call on the hypervisor <E.HV>.
                                   Table 4-34. System Linkage Instruction

                                           Name       Mnemonic   Syntax

                                        System Call      sc        LEV

Executing sc invokes the system call interrupt handler or the hypervisor system call interrupt handler
depending on the value of the LEV. For more information, see Section 7.8.9, “System Call Interrupt,” and
Section 7.8.26, “Embedded Hypervisor System Call Interrupt <E.HV>.”
An sc instruction without the LEV field is treated by the assembler as an sc with LEV = 0 <E.HV>.
                                   NOTE: Software Considerations
                A user-level program should not invoke sc with LEV=1, unless the
                user-level program is explicitly intended to execute directly under the
                control of the hypervisor.
                                     NOTE: Software Considerations
                A hypervisor should treat the execution of an sc with LEV=1 from a
                user-level program as an illegal instruction unless the partition which
                executed the instruction is expected by the hypervisor to perform system
                calls directly to the hypervisor.

4.6.1.11      Embedded Hypervisor Privilege Instruction <E.HV>
The Embedded Hypervisor Privilege (ehpriv) instruction causes an embedded hypervisor privilege
exception and subsequent interrupt. ehpriv is used by the hypervisor to provide an emulation capability for
virtual instructions defined by the hypervisor. The OC field is not interpreted by hardware but is for the
use of the hypervisor to provide specific emulation.
This table lists the embedded hypervisor privilege instruction.
                           Table 4-35. Embedded Hypervisor Privilege Instruction

                                           Name               Mnemonic    Syntax

                              Embedded Hypervisor Privilege      ehpriv    OC




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-59
Instruction Model


                                       NOTE: Software Considerations
                    If the hypervisor creates virtual instructions, it should defined extended
                    mnemonics for such instructions in the assembler that encode into the OC
                    field.

4.6.1.12        Debug Instruction
The Debugger Notify Halt (dnh) instruction (see Table 4-36) is a user-level instruction that provides the
means for the transfer of information between the processor and an implementation-dependent external
debug facility. If the processor is in external debug mode and is configured to halt on the execution of dnh,
dnh causes the processor to stop fetching and executing instructions, entering an external debug halt state.
If the processor is not in external debug mode, executing dnh causes an illegal instruction exception.
                                              Table 4-36. Debug Instruction

                                                Name            Mnemonic     Syntax

                                        Debugger Notify Halt      dnh       DUI,DUIS


4.6.1.13        Processor Control Instructions
User-level processor control instructions are used to read from and write to the CR and special-purpose
registers (SPRs), as well as the wait instruction.

4.6.1.13.1          Move to/from Condition Register Instructions
This table summarizes the instructions for reading from or writing to the CR.
                              Table 4-37. Move to/from Condition Register Instructions

                                          Name                          Mnemonic            Syntax

                       Move to Condition Register Fields                   mtcrf            CRM,rS

                       Move to Condition Register from XER                 mcrxr                crD

                       Move from Condition Register                         mfcr                rD

                       Move from One Condition Register Field              mfocrf           rD,FXM

                       Move to One Condition Register Field                mtocrf           FXM,rS


4.6.1.13.2          Move to/from Special-Purpose Register Instructions
This table lists the mtspr and mfspr instructions.
                          Table 4-38. Move to/from Special-Purpose Register Instructions

                                                 Name                   Mnemonic       Syntax

                                 Move to Special-Purpose Register          mtspr       SPR,rS

                                 Move from Special-Purpose Register        mfspr       rD,SPR

                                 Move from Time Base                       mftb       rD,TBRN
                                                                                       rD,SPR


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-60                                                                                                  Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


See Section 3.2.2, “Special-Purpose Registers (SPRs)” for a complete list of SPRs defined by EIS and their
access levels.

4.6.1.13.3      Wait for Interrupt Instruction
The wait instruction stops synchronous processor activity including the fetching of instructions until an
asynchronous interrupt, a debug post-completion (ICMP) interrupt occurs, or the event specified by the
WC operand occurs. A processor typically uses this to reduce power consumption.
                                    Table 4-39. Wait for Interrupt Instruction

                                        Name          Mnemonic       Syntax

                                Wait for Interrupt      wait         WC,WH

Not all processors implement events defined by the WC operand or allow the hint from the WH operand.

4.6.1.14      Performance Monitor Instructions
The performance monitor provides read-only, user-level access to some performance monitor resources.
Instructions are listed in this table.
                                 Table 4-40. Performance Monitor Instructions

                              Name                             Mnemonic              Syntax
             Move from Performance Monitor Register              mfpmr              rD,PMRN

The user-level PMRs listed in Section 3.15.4, “Performance Monitor Counter Registers (PMCn/UPMCn)”
are accessed with mfpmr. Attempting to write user-level PMRs in either mode causes an illegal instruction
exception.

4.6.1.15      Memory Synchronization Instructions
Memory synchronization instructions control the order in which memory operations complete with respect
to asynchronous events and the order in which memory operations are seen by other mechanisms that
access memory. Further information about memory barriers and storage ordering is described in
Section 6.4.8, “Shared Memory.”




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-61
Instruction Model


This table lists the memory synchronization instructions.
                                  Table 4-41. Memory Synchronization Instructions

    Name       Mnemonic     Syntax                                             Notes

Instruction         isync     —       isync is used to perform context serialization for the instruction stream. isync waits for
Synchronize                          previous instructions (including any interrupts they generate) to complete before isync
                                     executes, which purges all instructions from the processor and refetches the next
                                     instruction. isync does not wait for pending stores to complete.
Memory              mbar     MO      mbar provides a pipelined memory barrier. (Note that mbar uses the same opcode as
Barrier                              eieio from the PowerPC architecture.) The behavior of mbar depends on the MO
                                     operand.

                                     MO = 0—mbar behaves identically to sync 0.
                                     MO = 1—mbar is a weaker, faster memory barrier that guarantees the same ordering as
                                     defined by the eieio instruction from the PowerPC architecture.
 Synchronize        sync      L      sync provides an ordering function for the effects of all instructions executed by the
                                     processor executing the sync. Executing sync ensures that all previous instructions
                                     complete before it completes and that no subsequent instructions are initiated until after
                                     it completes. It also creates a memory barrier, which orders the storage accesses
                                     associated with these instructions. The behavior of sync depends on the L operand:

                                     L = 0—sync behaves as a heavyweight sync (extended mnemonic hwsync or sync with
                                     no operand) in which a memory barrier is created which orders all memory accesses.
                                     L =1—sync behaves as a lightweight sync (extended mnemonic lwsync) in which a
                                     lighter weight memory barrier is created which only orders storage accesses for a specific
                                     set of cacheable memory accesses.

                                     Previous versions of the architecture used the mnemonic msync for sync. msync is now
                                     an extended mnemonic for sync 0.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-62                                                                                                  Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


4.6.1.16      Atomic Update Primitives Using Load and Reserve and Store
              Conditional instructions
The load and reserve and store conditional instructions together permit atomic update of a memory
location. The architecture provides byte, half word, word, and double word forms of these instructions. For
the purposes of this section, the operation of the word forms lwarx and stwcx. are described here, although
any of the other memory sizes may be used.
A specified memory location that may be modified by other processors or mechanisms requires memory
coherence. If the location is in write-through required or caching-inhibited memory, the implementation
determines whether these instructions function correctly or cause the system data storage error handler to be
invoked. Consult the user documentation.
                                                  NOTE:
                The memory coherence required attribute on other processors and
                mechanisms ensures that their stores to the specified location will cause the
                reservation created by the lwarx to be cancelled.
A lwarx instruction is a load from a word-aligned location with the following side effects:
   • A reservation for a subsequent stwcx. instruction is created.
   • The memory coherence mechanism is notified that a reservation exists for the location accessed by
      the lwarx.
The stwcx. is a store to a word-aligned location that is conditioned on the existence of the reservation
created by the lwarx and on whether both instructions specify the same location. To emulate an atomic
operation, both lwarx and stwcx. must access the same location. The lwarx and stwcx. are ordered by a
dependence on the reservation, and the program is not required to insert other instructions to maintain the
order of memory accesses caused by these two instructions.
A stwcx. performs a store to the target location only if the location accessed by the lwarx that established
the reservation has not been stored into by another processor or mechanism between supplying a value for
the lwarx and storing the value supplied by the stwcx.. If the instructions specify different locations, the
store is not necessarily performed. CR0 is modified to indicate whether the store was performed, as
follows:
    • CR0[LT,GT,EQ,SO] = 0b00 || store_performed || XER[SO]
If a stwcx. completes but does not perform the store because a reservation no longer exists, CR0 is
modified to indicate that the stwcx. completed without altering memory.
A stwcx. that performs its store is said to succeed.
Examples using lwarx and stwcx. are given in Appendix D, “Programming Examples.”
A successful stwcx. to a given location may complete before its store has been performed with respect to
other processors and mechanisms. As a result, a subsequent load or lwarx from the given location on
another processor may return a stale value. However, a subsequent lwarx from the given location on the
other processor followed by a successful stwcx. on that processor is guaranteed to have returned the value
stored by the first processor’s stwcx. (in the absence of other stores to the given location).


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-63
Instruction Model


4.6.1.16.1          Reservations
The ability to emulate an atomic operation using lwarx and stwcx. is based on the conditional behavior of
stwcx., the reservation set by lwarx, and the clearing of that reservation if the target location is modified
by another processor or mechanism before the stwcx. performs its store.
A reservation is held on an aligned unit of real memory called a reservation granule. The size of the
reservation granule is implementation-dependent, but is a multiple of four bytes for lwarx. The reservation
granule associated with EA contains the real address to which the EA maps. (In the RTL for the load and
reserve and store conditional instructions, ‘real_addr(EA)’ stands for ‘real address to which EA maps.’)
When one processor holds a reservation and another processor performs a store, the first processor’s
reservation is cleared when the store affects any bytes in the reservation granule.
                                        NOTE: Software Considerations
                    One use of lwarx and stwcx. is to emulate a compare and swap primitive
                    like that provided by the IBM System/370 compare and swap instruction,
                    which checks only that the old and current values of the word being tested
                    are equal, with the result that programs that use such a compare and swap to
                    control a shared resource can err if the word has been modified and the old
                    value is subsequently restored. The use of lwarx and stwcx. improves on
                    such a compare and swap, because the reservation reliably binds lwarx and
                    stwcx. together. The reservation is always lost if the word is modified by
                    another processor or mechanism between the lwarx and stwcx., so the
                    stwcx. never succeeds unless the word has not been stored into (by another
                    processor or mechanism) since the lwarx.
A processor has at most one reservation at any time. The architecture states that a reservation is established
by executing a lwarx and is lost (or may be lost, in the case of the fourth and fifth bullets) if any of the
following occurs:
    • The processor holding the reservation executes another lwarx; this clears the first reservation and
       establishes a new one.
    • The processor holding the reservation executes any stwcx., regardless of whether the specified
       address matches that of the lwarx.
    • Another processor executes a store or dcbz, dcbzl <DEO>, dcbzep <E.PD>, or
       dcbzlep <E.PD,DEO> to the same reservation granule.
    • Another processor executes a dcbtst, dcbst, or dcbf to the same reservation granule; whether the
       reservation is lost is undefined.
    • Another processor executes a dcba or dcbal <DEO> to the reservation granule. The reservation is
       lost if the instruction causes the target block to be newly established in the data cache or to be
       modified; otherwise, whether the reservation is lost is undefined.
    • Some other mechanism modifies a location in the same reservation granule.
    • An asynchronous interrupt may cause a reservation to be lost.
    • Other implementation-specific conditions may also cause the reservation to be cleared, See the
       core reference manual.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-64                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


Interrupts are not guaranteed to clear reservations. (However, system software invoked by interrupts may
clear reservations.)
In general, programming conventions must ensure that lwarx and stwcx. specify addresses that match; a
stwcx. should be paired with a specific lwarx to the same location. Situations in which a stwcx. may
erroneously be issued after some lwarx other than that with which it is intended to be paired must be
scrupulously avoided. For example, there must not be a context switch in which the processor holds a
reservation in behalf of the old context, and the new context resumes after a lwarx and before the paired
stwcx.. The stwcx. in the new context might succeed, which is not what was intended by the programmer.
Such a situation must be prevented by issuing a stwcx. to a dummy writable word-aligned location as part
of the context switch, thereby clearing any reservation established by the old context. Executing stwcx. to
a word-aligned location is enough to clear the reservation, regardless of whether it was set by lwarx.

4.6.1.16.2      Forward Progress
Forward progress in loops that use lwarx and stwcx. is achieved by a cooperative effort among hardware,
operating system software, and application software.
One of the following is guaranteed when a processor executes a lwarx to obtain a reservation for location
X and then a stwcx. to store a value to location X:
   1. The stwcx. succeeds and the value is written to location X.
   2. The stwcx. fails because some other processor or mechanism modified location X.
   3. The stwcx. fails because the processor’s reservation was lost for some other reason.
In cases 1 and 2, the system as a whole makes progress in the sense that some processor successfully
modifies location X. Case 3 covers reservation loss required for correct operation of the rest of the system.
This includes cancellation caused by some other processor writing elsewhere in the reservation granule for
X, as well as cancellation caused by the operating system in managing certain limited resources such as
real memory or context switches. It may also include implementation-dependent causes of reservation
loss.
An implementation may make a forward progress guarantee, defining the conditions under which the
system as a whole makes progress. Such a guarantee must specify the possible causes of reservation loss
in case 3. Although the architecture alone cannot provide such a guarantee, the conditions in cases 1 and
2 are necessary for a guarantee. An implementation and operating system can build on them to provide
such a guarantee.
                                                  NOTE
                The architecture does not guarantee fairness. In competing for a reservation,
                two processors can indefinitely lock out a third.

4.6.1.16.3      Reservation Loss Due to Granularity
Lock words should be allocated such that contention for the locks and updates to nearby data structures do
not cause excessive reservation losses due to false indications of sharing that can occur due to the
reservation granularity.



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-65
Instruction Model


A processor holding a reservation on any word in a reservation granule loses its reservation if some other
processor stores anywhere in that granule. Such problems can be avoided only by ensuring that few such
stores occur. This can most easily be accomplished by allocating an entire granule for a lock and wasting
all but one word.
Reservation granularity may vary for each implementation. There are no architectural restrictions
bounding the granularity implementations must support, so reasonably portable code must dynamically
allocate aligned and padded memory for locks to guarantee absence of granularity-induced reservation
loss.

4.6.1.17        Cache Management Instructions
This section briefly describes the user-level cache management instructions. See Section 4.6.2.2,
“Supervisor-Level Memory Control Instructions,” for supervisor-level cache management instructions.
Cache management instructions help software more explicitly manage on-chip caches. They allow
software to perform functions such as touch, flush, invalidate, zero, allocate, and lock to addressed cache
lines (blocks). Because cache blocks have an implementation-dependent size, such instructions should be
used with care or used only in a library where the library executes such instructions with knowledge of the
cache block size.
As with other memory-related instructions, the effects of cache management instructions on memory are
weakly ordered. If the programmer must ensure that cache or other instructions have been performed with
respect to all other processors and system mechanisms, an sync must be placed after those instructions.
It is permissible for an implementation to treat any or all of the cache touch instructions (icbt, dcbt, or
dcbtst) as no-ops, even if a cache is implemented.

4.6.1.17.1          Cache Target Identifiers
Some cache management instructions, such as cache locking instructions, provide an immediate operand
CT (or TH for dcbt and dcbtst instructions) that explicitly designate a particular cache in a hierarchy of
caches. Such values are cache target identifiers or “CT values.” EIS defines CT values to be within the
range of 0–7. Other CT values are boundedly undefined and should not be used.
CT values are said to be internal if they specify a cache that is specific to the processor core, or the
processor core complex and the processor core that issues the instruction defines which cache the
operation applies to. CT values are said to be external if they specify a cache explicitly regardless of which
processor core the request is issued from. By definition, external CT values must be mapped one to one to
specific caches within a coherence domain.
The following CT values are defined:
   • CT = 0 indicates the L1 (or primary) cache or the processor that executes the instruction. When the
       primary cache is a separated instruction and data cache (harvard architecture), the type of
       instruction determines whether the operation is performed to the instruction cache or the data
       cache. CT = 0 is an internal CT value.
   • CT = 1 indicates the I/O or platform cache, if one is implemented on the integrated device. Note
       that some documentation refers to this cache as a frontside L2 cache. CT = 1 is an external CT


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-66                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                            Instruction Model


         value.
         Additional external CT values may be defined by the integrated device.
    •    CT = 2 indicates the L2 cache. The L2 cache may be private to a processor or may be shared among
         several processors in a processor complex. CT = 2 is an internal CT value.
    •    The CT values of 4 and 6 are reserved for internal CT values. Executing any cache management
         instruction with a CT value of 4 or 6 is boundedly undefined.
    •    The CT values 3, 5, and 7 are reserved for implementation defined external CT values.
Any cache management instruction that contains a valid internal CT value, but no such cache is
implemented, is treated as a no-op. Any cache management instruction which contains an external CT
value is always treated as valid. If no such external CT value is implemented on the integrated device, the
results are implementation specific.

4.6.1.17.2      User-Level Cache Management Instructions
This table summarizes the cache management instructions.
                                  Table 4-42. User-Level Cache Instructions
        Name       Mnemonic    Syntax                                       Description

Data Cache Block      dcba      rA,rB   dcba is a performance hint that allocates a block specified by EA in the data
Allocate                                cache without first reading the contents from the memory subsystem. The result
                                        leaves the contents of the block as undefined. It is expected that the processor
                                        executing the dcba will subsequently perform stores to write the block to define
                                        its contents. dcba can be used when the entire block is to be written and the
                                        current contents of the block are no longer required.

                                        Many implementations will treat dcba as dcbz and zero the block when it is
                                        allocated.

                                        L1CSR0[DCBZ32] = 1, dcba operates on 32 byte aligned granules (32-byte
                                        operation). This may perform slower on some implementations.

                                        This instruction is treated as a store with respect to translation, protection, and
                                        debug address comparisons.

                                        The dcba is treated as a no-op if the block cannot be allocated in the cache, if the
                                        page is marked write-through or cache-inhibited, or if a TLB protection violation
                                        occurs. Other implementation specific conditions can cause the dcba to be
                                        treated as a no-op. See the core reference manual.
Data Cache Block      dcbal     rA,rB   dcbal behaves the same as dcba except it always operates on all bytes in the
Allocate by Line                        cache line regardless of the setting of L1CSR0[DCBZ32] .
<DEO>




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                  4-67
Instruction Model


                              Table 4-42. User-Level Cache Instructions (continued)
       Name         Mnemonic     Syntax                                        Description
Data Cache Block       dcbf       rA,rB   dcbf flushes the block specified by EA from the data cache. If the block exists and
Flush                                     is modified in the cache, the block is first written back to memory. The cache block
                                          is then invalidated. If the block does not exist in the cache, no action in the cache
                                          is taken.

                                          Only local caches (primary data cache and L2 cache) are affected when the
                                          address is not in memory that is Memory Coherence Required, otherwise the
                                          operation applies to all caches in the coherence domain.

                                          This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and
                                          debug address comparisons.
Data Cache Block       dcbz       rA,rB   dcbz allocates the block specified by EA in the cache (if it does not already exist)
Zero                                      and sets all bytes in the block to zero.If the block is allocated in the cache, the
                                          block is allocated without first reading its contents from the memory subsystem.

                                          If the address specified by EA is caching inhibited or write-through, dcbz will
                                          either take an alignment interrupt or set all the bytes specified by the cache block
                                          to zero. If the block cannot be established in the cache (because the cache may
                                          be locked or disabled), it is implementation dependent whether an alignment
                                          interrupt occurs or the dcbz sets all the bytes in the cache line to zero.

                                          L1CSR0[DCBZ32] = 1, dcbz operates on 32 byte aligned granules (32-byte
                                          operation). This may perform slower on some implementations.

                                          This instruction is treated as a store with respect to memory barriers,
                                          synchronization, translation and protection, and debug address comparisons.
Data Cache Block      dcbzl       rA,rB   dcbzl behaves the same as dcbz except it always operates on all bytes in the
Zero by Line                              cache line regardless of the setting of L1CSR0[DCBZ32] .
<DEO>
Data Cache Block      dcbst       rA,rB   dcbst flushes the block specified by EA from the data cache. If the block exists
Store                                     and is modified in the cache, the block is written back to memory. It is
                                          implementation dependent whether the block remains in the cache after being
                                          flushed. If it remains in the cache, it is not in a modified state. If the block does not
                                          exist in the cache, no action in the cache is taken.

                                          Only local caches (primary data cache and L2 cache) are affected when the
                                          address is not in memory that is memory coherence required, otherwise the
                                          operation applies to all caches in the coherence domain.

                                          This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and
                                          debug address comparisons.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-68                                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                  Instruction Model


                                  Table 4-42. User-Level Cache Instructions (continued)
        Name           Mnemonic      Syntax                                       Description

Data Cache Block          dcbt       TH,rA,rB dcbt is a performance hint that causes the block specified by EA to be read from
Touch 1                                       memory and established in the cache specified by TH. As a hint, the processor
                                              may treat the operation as a no-op.

                                               The dcbt is treated as a no-op if translation would cause any exception (including
                                               DTLB and DSI exceptions), the line cannot be allocated in the cache, or if the
                                               address is write-through or cache-inhibited. Other implementation specific
                                               conditions can cause the dcbt to be treated as a no-op. See the core reference
                                               manual.

                                               This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and
                                               debug address comparisons.

                                               It is implementation dependent whether a dcbt that is treated as a no-op will
                                               cause debug events.
Data Cache Block         dcbtst      TH,rA,rB dcbtst behaves the same as dcbt, except the hint assumes that software will
Touch for Store 1                             soon write to the block.
                                              Some implementations may also treat this instruction as a store with respect to
                                              translation and protection.
Instruction Cache         icbi        rA,rB    icbi invalidates the block specified by EA from the instruction caches and L2
Block Invalidate                               caches which implement harvard architecture semantics. icbi should always be
                                               followed by a sync and an isync to make sure its effects are seen by instruction
                                               fetches and instruction execution following the icbi itself.

                                               This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and
                                               debug address comparisons.
Instruction Cache         icbt       CT,rA,rB icbt is a performance hint that causes the block specified by EA to be read from
Block Touch                                   memory and established in the instruction cache specified by CT. As a hint, the
                                              processor may treat the operation as a no-op.

                                               The icbt is treated as a no-op if translation would cause any exception (including
                                               DTLB and DSI exceptions), the line cannot be allocated in the cache, or if the
                                               address is write-through or cache-inhibited. Other implementation specific
                                               conditions can cause the icbt to be treated as a no-op. See the core reference
                                               manual.

                                               It is implementation dependent whether icbt requires read or execute
                                               permissions to perform the hint.

                                               This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and
                                               debug address comparisons.

                                               It is implementation dependent whether an icbt that is treated as a no-op will
                                               cause debug events.


1   A program that uses dcbt and dcbtst improperly is less efficient. To improve performance, HID0[NOPTI] can be set, which
    causes dcbt and dcbtst to be no-oped at the cache. The default state of this bit is zero, which enables the use of these
    instructions.




           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                        4-69
Instruction Model


4.6.1.17.3          Cache Locking Instructions <E.CL>
Cache locking instructions provide the capability to lock cache blocks into specific caches. Cache locking
instructions require supervisor privilege to execute unless MSR[UCLE] is set. A complete description of
cache locking behaviors is described in Section 6.3.1, “Cache Line Locking <E.CL>.”
This table lists the cache locking instructions.
                                       Table 4-43. Cache Locking Instructions

       Name           Mnemonic Syntax                                           Description
Data Cache Block       dcblc     CT,rA,rB The line in the specified cache is unlocked, making it eligible for replacement.
Lock Clear
                                           This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and debug
                                           address comparisons.
Data Cache Block       dcblq.    CT,rA,rB The line in the specified cache is queried. The status of the lock is placed into
Lock Query                                CR0[EQ].

                                           This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and debug
                                           address comparisons.
Data Cache Block       dcbtls    CT,rA,rB The line is loaded and locked into the specified cache.
Touch and Lock Set
                                           This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and debug
                                           address comparisons.
Data Cache Block      dcbtstls   CT,rA,rB The line is loaded and locked into the specified cache. The line is marked as
Touch for Store and                       modified.
Lock Set
                                           It is implementation dependent whether this instruction is treated as a load or a store
                                           with respect to translation, protection, and debug address comparisons.
Instruction Cache       icblc    CT,rA,rB The line in the specified cache is unlocked, making it eligible for replacement.
Block Lock Clear
                                           This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and debug
                                           address comparisons.
Instruction Cache      icblq.    CT,rA,rB The line in the specified cache is queried. The status of the lock is placed into
Block Lock Query                          CR0[EQ].

                                           This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and debug
                                           address comparisons.
Instruction Cache      icbtls    CT,rA,rB The line is loaded and locked into the specified cache.
Block Touch and
Lock Set                                   This instruction is treated as a load with respect to translation, protection, and debug
                                           address comparisons.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-70                                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                  Instruction Model


4.6.2        Hypervisor- and Supervisor-Level Instructions
This section describes the hypervisor- and supervisor-level instructions provided by the architecture.
Supervisor instructions are used to perform TLB operations, access privileged registers, and handle
interrupts.
Instructions described here have an associated privilege and actions as described in this table.
                            Table 4-44. Instruction Execution Based on Privilege Level

 Privilege Level              User Mode                 Guest Supervisor Mode             Hypervisor Mode
 of Instruction           (MSR[GS,PR]=0bx1)              (MSR[GS,PR]=0b10)               (MSR[GS,PR]=0b00)

      User                 execute normally                 execute normally              execute normally

Guest Supervisor   privileged instruction exception         execute normally              execute normally

   Hypervisor                                         embedded hypervisor privilege
                   privileged instruction exception                                       execute normally
                                                              exception


4.6.2.1         System Linkage and MSR Access Instructions
Table 4-45 lists system linkage instructions defined by the architecture. The user-level sc (LEV = 0)
instruction lets a user program call on the system to perform a service and causes the processor to take a
system call interrupt. The sc (LEV = 1) <E.HV> instruction is also used for the supervisor to invoke the
hypervisor to perform a service and causes the processor to take an embedded hypervisor system call
interrupt. The supervisor-level rfi and rfgi <E.HV> instructions are used for returning from an interrupt
handler. The rfci instruction is used for critical interrupts; rfdi is used for debug interrupts;<E.ED> rfmci
is used for machine check interrupts.
Return from interrupt instructions are context-synchronizing.
<Embedded.Hypervisor>:
In guest supervisor state, rfi (rfgi) cannot modify any MSR bits protected by MSRP or MSR[GS]. Guest
supervisor software should use rfi, rfci, rfdi <E.ED>, and rfmci when returning from their associated
interrupts. When a guest operating system executes rfi, the processor maps the instruction to rfgi assuring
that the appropriate guest save/restore registers are used for the return. For rfci, rfdi <E.ED>, and rfmci,
the hypervisor should emulate these instructions as it will emulate the taking of these interrupts in guest
supervisor state.
Privileges are as follows:
    • sc is user privileged.
    • rfi (rfgi <E.HV>), mfmsr, mtmsr, wrtee, wrteei are guest–supervisor privileged.
    • rfci, rfdi <E.ED>, rfmci are hypervisor privileged.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-71
Instruction Model


                             Table 4-45. System Linkage Instructions—Supervisor-Level

                Name                  Mnemonic Syntax                                    Description

Return from Interrupt                    rfi       —          rfi is used to return from a base level interrupt. SRR0/SRR1 are
                                                              used to provide the return address and MSR value respectively. rfgi
                                                              is executed in place of rfi when executed in guest supervisor state.

Return from Guest Interrupt <E.HV>      rfgi       —          rfgi is used to return from a base level interrupt. GSRR0/GSRR1
                                                              are used to provide the return address and MSR value respectively.

Return from Critical Interrupt           rfci      —          rfci is used to return from a critical level interrupt. CSRR0/SCRR1
                                                              are used to provide the return address and MSR value respectively.

Return from Debug Interrupt <E.ED>      rfdi       —          rfdi is used to return from a debug level interrupt. SDRR0/DSRR1
                                                              are used to provide the return address and MSR value respectively.

Return from Machine Check Interrupt     rfmci      —          rfmci is used to return from a machine check level interrupt.
                                                              MCSRR0/MCSRR1 are used to provide the return address and
                                                              MSR value respectively.

System Call                              sc        LEV        sc invokes a system service depending on the value of LEV:
                                                              LEV = 0 - system call interrupt,
                                                              LEV = 1 - embedded hypervisor system call interrupt <E.HV>

This table lists instructions for accessing the MSR.
                            Table 4-46. Move to/from Machine State Register Instructions

                    Name                Mnemonic Syntax                                    Description

Move from Machine State Register          mfmsr          rD       mfmsr copies the contents of the MSR to rD.

Move to Machine State Register            mtmsr          rS       mtmsr copies the contents of rS to the MSR. In guest
                                                                  supervisor state mtmsr cannot alter MSR[GS] or any bits
                                                                  protected by MSRP. <E.HV>

Write MSR External Enable                 wrtee          rS       Bit 48 of the contents of rS is placed into MSR[EE]. Other MSR
                                                                  bits are unaffected.

Write MSR External Enable Immediate       wrteei         E        The value of E is placed into MSR[EE]. Other MSR bits are
                                                                  unaffected.


4.6.2.2         Supervisor-Level Memory Control Instructions
Memory control instructions include the following:
  • Cache management instructions (supervisor-level and user-level)
  • Translation lookaside buffer management instructions
This section describes supervisor-level memory control instructions. Section 4.6.1.17, “Cache
Management Instructions,” describes user-level memory control instructions.

4.6.2.2.1           Supervisor-Level Cache Management Instructions
This table lists the supervisor-level cache management instructions. dcbstep, dcbtep, dcbtstep, dcbfep,
icbiep, dcbzep, and dcbzlep are cache management instructions as well. Because they use external PID
semantics for translation, they are listed in Section 4.6.2.3, “External PID Instructions <E.PD>.”

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-72                                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                 Instruction Model


                          Table 4-47. Supervisor-Level Cache Management Instruction

   Name       Mnemonic Syntax                                              Description

Data Cache      dcbi      rA,rB   dcbi invalidates the block specified by EA from the data cache. If the block exists, is modified
   Block                          in the cache, and is marked as Memory Coherence Required, it is implementation
 Invalidate                       dependent whether the block is first written back to memory. The cache block is then
                                  invalidated. If the block does not exist in the cache, no action in the cache is taken.

                                  Only local caches (primary data cache and L2 cache) are affected when the address is not
                                  in memory that is Memory Coherence Required, otherwise the operation applies to all
                                  caches in the coherence domain.

                                  If the instruction causes modified data to be invalidated before writing the block back to
                                  memory, then the instruction is treated as a store with respect to memory barriers,
                                  synchronization, translation and protection, and debug address comparisons. Otherwise,
                                  the instruction is treated as a load with respect to memory barriers, synchronization,
                                  translation and protection, and debug address comparisons


                                                        NOTE: Software Considerations
                                                     Invalidation without flushing can cause
                                                     modified data to be lost. Software should
                                                     carefully consider the implications of using
                                                     dcbi.



See Section 4.6.1.17.2, “User-Level Cache Management Instructions,” for cache instructions that provide
user-level programs the ability to manage the on-chip caches.

4.6.2.2.2        TLB Management Instructions
The address translation mechanism is defined in terms of Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) entries used
to translate the effective-to-physical address mapping for a particular access. See Section 6.5, “MMU
Architecture,” for more information about TLB operations.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                       4-73
Instruction Model


This table summarizes the operation of the TLB instructions.
                                         Table 4-48. TLB Management Instructions

   Name        Mnemonic       Syntax                                             Description

     TLB            tlbilx    T, rA, rB tlbilx performs invalidations of TLB entries on the processor that executes the tlbilx
  Invalidate                            instruction. Any entry that has the IPROT attribute set is not invalidated. tlbilx can be used
    Local                               to invalidate all entries corresponding to a LPID value, all entries corresponding to a PID
   <E.HV>                               value, or a single entry. See Section 6.5, “MMU Architecture.”

                                        tlbilx is guest supervisor privileged, however it will cause an embedded hypervisor
                                        privilege exception if EPCR[DGTMI] is set.


                                                               NOTE: Software Considerations
                                                            tlbilx requires the same local-processor
                                                            synchronization as tlbivax, but not the
                                                            cross-processor synchronization (that is, it
                                                            does not require tlbsync).


TLB                 tlbivax    rA, rB   tlbivax performs invalidations of TLB entries. tlbivax invalidates any TLB entry on any
Invalidate                              processor in the coherence domain that corresponds to the virtual address calculated by
Virtual                                 this instruction. Any entry that has the IPROT attribute set is not invalidated. Thus an
Address                                 invalidate operation is broadcast throughout the coherence domain of the processor
Indexed                                 executing tlbivax. See Section 6.5, “MMU Architecture.”

                                        tlbivax is hypervisor privileged.

                                        Note: : The preferred form of tlbivax contains the entire EA in rB and zero in rA. Some
                                              implementations may take an illegal instruction exception if rA is nonzero.
                                        Note: : The preferred method of performing invalidations on processors that implement
                                              category E.HV is to execute tlbilx on all processors that need to perform the
                                              invalidation.

 TLB Read            tlbre       —      tlbre causes the contents of a single TLB entry to be extracted from the MMU and be
   Entry                                placed in the corresponding fields of the MAS registers. The entry extracted is specified
                                        by the TLBSEL, ESEL, and EPN fields of MAS0 and MAS2. The contents extracted from
                                        the MMU are placed in MAS0–MAS3, MAS7, and MAS8. See Section 6.5.3.3, “Reading
                                        and Writing TLB Entries.”

                                        tlbre is hypervisor privileged.

 TLB Search         tlbsx      rA, rB   tlbsx searches the MMU for a particular entry based on the computed EA and the search
  Indexed                               values in MAS5 and MAS6 .If a match is found, MAS1[V] is set and the found entry is read
                                        into the MAS0–MAS3, MAS7, and MAS8. If the entry is not found MAS1[V] is set to 0.See
                                        Section 6.5.3.3, “Reading and Writing TLB Entries.”

                                        tlbsx is hypervisor privileged.

                                        Note: : rA=0 is a preferred form for tlbsx and that some Freescale implementations take
                                              an illegal instruction exception if rA != 0.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-74                                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                             Instruction Model


                            Table 4-48. TLB Management Instructions (continued)

   Name       Mnemonic    Syntax                                            Description

   TLB         tlbsync      —      tlbsync provides ordering for the effects of all tlbivax instructions executed by the
Synchronize                        processor executing tlbsync, with respect to the memory barrier created when that
                                   processor executes a subsequent sync. Executing tlbsync ensures that all of the
                                   following occurs:
                                    • All TLB invalidations caused by tlbivax instructions before the tlbsync complete on
                                       any other processor before any storage accesses associated with data accesses
                                       caused by instructions following the sync are performed with respect to that processor.
                                    • All storage accesses by other processors for which the address was translated using
                                       the translations being invalidated, will have been performed with respect to the
                                       processor executing the sync, to the extent required by the associated memory
                                       coherence required attributes, before the mbar or sync instruction’s memory barrier is
                                       created.
                                   See Section 6.5, “MMU Architecture.”

                                   tlbsync is hypervisor privileged.

                                   Note that only one tlbsync can be in process at any given time on all processors of a
                                   coherence domain. The hypervisor or operating system should ensure this by doing the
                                   appropriate mutual exclusion.

 TLB Write      tlbwe       —      tlbwe causes the contents of certain fields of MAS0–MAS3, MAS7, and MAS8 to be
   Entry                           written into a single TLB entry in the MMU. The entry written is specified by the TLBSEL,
                                   ESEL, and EPN fields of MAS0 and MAS2. See Section 6.5.3.3, “Reading and Writing
                                   TLB Entries.”

                                   tlbwe is always hypervisor privileged.


4.6.2.3        External PID Instructions <E.PD>
External PID load and store instructions are used by the operating system and hypervisor to perform load,
store, and cache management instructions to a separate address space while still fetching and executing in
the normal supervisor or hypervisor context. The operating system or hypervisor selects the address space
to target by altering the contents of the EPLC and EPSC registers for loads and stores respectively. When
the effective address specified by the external PID load or store instruction is translated, the translation
mechanism uses ELPID, EPID, EAS, EPR, and EGS fields from the EPLC or EPSC register instead of
LPIDR, PID, MSR[DS], MSR[PR], and MSR[GS] values. Such instructions are useful for an operating
system to manipulate a processes virtual memory using the context and credentials of the process.
External PID instructions have analogous non-external PID load, store, or cache management instructions.
The instruction behavior is the same (except how the address space is translated and how permissions are
applied) for the external PID instruction and its analogous non-external PID instruction.
All external PID instructions are guest supervisor privileged.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                  4-75
Instruction Model


This table lists external PID load and store instructions.
                                 Table 4-49. External PID Load Store Instructions

                                                                                                   Non External
                                                                                                        PID
                              Instruction                              Mnemonic       Syntax
                                                                                                    Analogous
                                                                                                    Instruction

Data Cache Block Flush by External PID Indexed                          dcbfep         rA,rB           dcbf

Data Cache Block Store by External PID Indexed                         dcbstep         rA,rB           dcbst

Data Cache Block Touch by External PID Indexed                          dcbtep       TH,rA,rB          dcbt

Data Cache Block Touch for Store by External PID Indexed               dcbtstep      TH,rA,rB         dcbtst

Data Cache Block Zero by External PID Indexed                           dcbzep         rA,rB           dcbz

Data Cache Block Zero Line by External PID Indexed <DEO>                dcbzlep        rA,rB           dcbzl

Instruction Cache Block Invalidate by External PID Indexed              icbiep         rA,rB               icbi

Load Byte by External PID Indexed                                        lbepx        rD,rA,rB         lbzx

Load Doubleword by External PID Indexed <64>                             ldepx        rD,rA,rB             ldx

Load Floating-Point Double Word by External PID Indexed <FP>            lfdepx       frD,rA,rB         lfdx

Load Half Word by External PID Indexed                                   lhepx        rD,rA,rB         lhzx

Load Word by External PID Indexed                                       lwepx         rD,rA,rB         lwzx

Store Byte by External PID Indexed                                      stbepx        rS,rA,rB         stbx

Store Doubleword by External PID Indexed <64>                           stdepx        rS,rA,rB         stdx

Store Floating-Point Double Word by External PID Indexed <FP>           stfdepx      frS,rA,rB         stfdx

Store Half Word by External PID Indexed                                 sthepx        rS,rA,rB         sthx

Store Word by External PID Indexed                                      stwepx        rS,rA,rB         stwx

Vector Load Doubleword into Doubleword by External PID Indexed <SP>    evlddepx       rD,rA,rB        evlddx

Vector Store Doubleword into Doubleword by External PID Indexed <SP>   evstddepx      rS,rA,rB       evstddx

Load Vector by External PID Indexed <V>                                  lvepx       vD,rA,rB              lvx

Load Vector by External PID Indexed LRU <V>                             lvepxl       vD,rA,rB              lvxl

Store Vector by External PID Indexed <V>                                stvepx       vS,rA,rB          stvx

Store Vector by External PID Indexed LRU <V>                            stvepxl      vS,rA,rB          stvxl


4.6.2.4         Hypervisor-Level Messaging Instructions <E.PC>
Messaging instructions provide facilities for processors within a coherence domain to send messages to
other devices in the coherence domain. The facility provides a mechanism for sending interrupts to other
processors that are not dependent on the interrupt controller and allow message filtering by the processors
that receive the message.
Messaging initiated by processors to processors is topology independent, and when category E.HV is
implemented is also fully partitioned.

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-76                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                            Instruction Model


Some message types, particularly the Guest Processor Doorbell types, are used by the hypervisor to reflect
(or synthesize) interrupts to a guest operating system when the operating system has set the appropriate
asynchronous interrupt enables.
Messaging instructions are also useful for sending messages to a device to provide specialized services
such as secure boot operations controlled by a security device. EIS does not define any such messages at
this time. EIS does define processor-to-processor messaging and what actions processors take on the
receipt of a message. The actions taken by devices other than processors is left to the architectural
definition of that particular device.

4.6.2.4.1        Sending and Receiving Messages
Processors initiate a message by executing the msgsnd instruction and specifying a message type and
message payload in a general purpose register. Sending a message causes the message to be sent to all the
processors, including the sending processor, in the coherence domain in a reliable manner. The message is
broadcast on the interconnect mechanism that connects all devices in the coherence domain and has a
unique transaction type that cannot be generated using any other processor operations. The uniqueness of
the transaction type insures that processors can only generate a message transaction using the defined
instructions that send such messages.
Each device receives all messages that are sent. The actions that a device takes are dependent on the
message type and payload. There are no restrictions on what messages a processor can send.
When a device or processor receives a message, the processor examines the message type and payload to
determine whether the device or processor should accept the message. This is called message “filtering.”
If, after examining the payload, the device or processor decides that the message should be processed (that
is, has met all the appropriate criteria specified in the message type and payload), the device or processor
accepts the message and processes it accordingly.
Processors that implement the category E.PC filter and accept messages are defined in Table 4-50.
Processors that also implement category E.HV and filter and accept messages are defined in Table 4-51.
Processors ignore (that is, filter and do not accept) any messages with other message types.
                                     Table 4-50. Processor Message Types

 Message                                                                                                      Interrupt
               Message Type
    Type                                             Message Type Description                                 Enabling
                  Name
(bits 32:36)                                                                                                  Condition

     0            DBELL       Doorbell. A processor doorbell interrupt (see Section 7.8.21, “Processor MSR[EE]
                              Doorbell Interrupt <E.PC>”) is generated or pended on the processor when
                              the processor has filtered the message based on the payload and has
                              determined that it should accept the message. A processor doorbell
                              interrupt is gated by MSR[EE].

     1         DBELL_CRIT     Doorbell Critical. A processor doorbell critical interrupt (see Section 7.8.22, MSR[CE]
                              “Processor Doorbell Critical Interrupt <E.PC>”) is generated or pended on
                              the processor when the processor has filtered the message based on the
                              payload and has determined that it should accept the message. A
                              processor doorbell critical interrupt is gated by MSR[CE].




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                 4-77
Instruction Model


                                   Table 4-51. Processor Message Types <E.HV>

  Message                                                                                                      Interrupt
                Message Type
     Type                                              Message Type Description                                Enabling
                   Name
 (bits 32:36)                                                                                                  Condition

       2            G_DBELL      Guest Doorbell. A guest processor doorbell interrupt (see            MSR[EE] &
                                 Section 7.8.23, “Guest Processor Doorbell Interrupt <E.HV>”) is      MSR[GS]
                                 generated or pended on the processor when the processor has filtered
                                 the message based on the payload and has determined that it should
                                 accept the message. A guest processor doorbell interrupt is gated by
                                 MSR[EE] & MSR[GS].

                                 Note: Guest processor doorbell interrupts are directed to the hypervisor
                                 and will only interrupt when the guest is in execution. This message is
                                 used by hypervisor software to reflect or emulate an MSR[EE] based
                                 asynchronous interrupt to the guest operating system.

       3        G_DBELL_CRIT Guest Doorbell Critical. A guest processor doorbell critical interrupt (see MSR[CE] &
                             Section 7.8.24, “Guest Processor Doorbell Critical Interrupt <E.HV>”) is MSR[GS]
                             generated or pended on the processor when the processor has filtered
                             the message based on the payload and has determined that it should
                             accept the message. A guest processor doorbell critical interrupt is
                             gated by MSR[CE] & MSR[GS].

                                 Note: Guest processor doorbell critical interrupts are directed to the
                                 hypervisor and will only interrupt when the guest is in execution. This
                                 message is used by hypervisor software to reflect or emulate an
                                 MSR[CE] based asynchronous interrupt to the guest operating system.

       4        G_DBELL_MC       Guest Doorbell Machine Check. A guest processor doorbell machine       MSR[ME] &
                                 check interrupt (see Section 7.8.25, “Guest Processor Doorbell Machine MSR[GS]
                                 Check Interrupt <E.HV>”) is generated or pended on the processor
                                 when the processor has filtered the message based on the payload and
                                 has determined that it should accept the message. A guest processor
                                 doorbell machine check interrupt is gated by MSR[ME] & MSR[GS].

                                 Note: Guest processor doorbell machine check interrupts are directed to
                                 the hypervisor and will only interrupt when the guest is in execution. This
                                 message is used by hypervisor software to reflect or emulate an
                                 MSR[ME] based asynchronous interrupt to the guest operating system.

If the message is accepted, the message may be pended if the interrupt gating conditions are not met. For
example, a DBELL_CRIT message is received on a processor and is accepted; however, MSR[CE] = 0 at
the time the message is accepted. The interrupt is pended until MSR[CE] changes to 1.
Messages of the same type are not cumulative; that is, if a message of type n is accepted, and the interrupt
is pended, further messages of type n accepted by the processor are ignored until the associated pending
condition is cleared by taking the interrupt or executing a msgclr instruction on the accepting processor.
In general, software will be required to use memory to perform higher level messaging, using msgsnd to
notify other processors that higher level messages are waiting for the accepting processor to process. For
this reason, a sync 0 will order any previous stores and any subsequent msgsnd operations. This ensures
that the stores to write higher level message information are performed before the message is sent. The
timing relationship between when a message is sent and when it is received is not defined.


           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-78                                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                      Instruction Model


4.6.2.5           Performance Monitor Instructions
The performance monitor instructions provide read-write access to performance monitor resources.
Instructions are listed in this table.
                              Table 4-52. Supervisor Performance Monitor Instructions

                                    Name                        Mnemonic                  Syntax
                Move from Performance Monitor Register            mfpmr                  rD,PMRN
                Move to Performance Monitor Register              mtpmr                  PMRN,rS

The PMRs listed in Section 3.15, “Performance Monitor Registers (PMRs) <E.PM>” are accessed with
mfpmr and mtpmr.
The hypervisor can restrict guest supervisor access to PMRs by setting MSRP[PMMP]. <E.HV>

4.6.2.6           Supervisor Level Device Control Register Instructions <E.DC>
Device control register instructions are used to read and write Device Control Registers (DCRs). The
definition of DCRs is implementation dependent. Device control instructions are hypervisor privileged.
This table lists the device control instructions.
                                    Table 4-53. Device Control Register Instructions

                                        Instruction                            Mnemonic            Syntax

         Move From Device Control Register                                       mfdcr         rD,DCRN

         Move To Device Control Register                                         mtdcr         DCRN,rS


4.6.3           Recommended Simplified Mnemonics
To simplify assembly language programming, simplified mnemonics and symbols are provided for some
frequently used instructions. These are listed in Section C.10, “Recommended Simplified Mnemonics.”
Programs written to be portable across the various assemblers for the architecture should not assume the
existence of mnemonics not described in this document.

4.7           Instruction Listing
This table lists the instructions defined by EIS except for instructions defined by category VLE.
                                               Table 4-54. Instruction Set

 Mnemonic                Syntax            Category                            Comments

      add                rD,rA,rB           Base                                   —

      add.               rD,rA,rB           Base                                   —

    addc                 rD,rA,rB           Base                                   —

    addc.                rD,rA,rB           Base                                   —

   addco                 rD,rA,rB           Base                                   —


             EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                           4-79
Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                              Comments

    addco.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                    —

       adde               rD,rA,rB          Base                                    —

       adde.              rD,rA,rB          Base                                    —

    addeo                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                    —

    addeo.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                    —

       addi             rD,rA,SIMM          Base                                    —

       addic            rD,rA,SIMM          Base                                    —

    addic.              rD,rA,SIMM          Base                                    —

       addis            rD,rA,SIMM          Base                                    —

    addme                  rD,rA            Base                                    —

   addme.                  rD,rA            Base                                    —

   addmeo                  rD,rA            Base                                    —

   addmeo.                 rD,rA            Base                                    —

       addo               rD,rA,rB          Base                                    —

       addo.              rD,rA,rB          Base                                    —

       addze               rD,rA            Base                                    —

    addze.                 rD,rA            Base                                    —

   addzeo                  rD,rA            Base                                    —

   addzeo.                 rD,rA            Base                                    —

        and               rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

       and.               rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

       andc               rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

       andc.              rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

       andi.            rA,rS,UIMM          Base                                    —

    andis.              rA,rS,UIMM          Base                                    —

         b                   LI             Base                                    —

        ba                   LI             Base                                    —

        bc               BO,BI,BD           Base                                    —

        bca              BO,BI,BD           Base                                    —

       bcctr               BO,BI            Base                                    —

       bcctrl              BO,BI            Base                                    —

        bcl              BO,BI,BD           Base                                    —

       bcla              BO,BI,BD           Base                                    —


              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-80                                                                                          Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                    Instruction Model


                                      Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic               Syntax          Category                              Comments

     bclr                BO,BI            Base                                    —

    bclrl                BO,BI            Base                                    —

      bl                   LI             Base                                    —

     bla                   LI             Base                                    —

   bpermd               rA,rS,rB           64                                     —

    brinc               rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    cmp               crD,L,rA,rB         Base                                    —

    cmpb                rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

    cmpi             crD,L,rA,SIMM        Base                                    —

    cmpl               crD,rA,rB          Base                                    —

    cmpli            crD,L,rA,UIMM        Base                                    —

    cntlzd               rA,rS             64                                     —

   cntlzd.               rA,rS             64                                     —

   cntlzw                rA,rS            Base                                    —

   cntlzw.               rA,rS            Base                                    —

    crand           crbD,crbA,crbB        Base                                    —

   crandc           crbD,crbA,crbB        Base                                    —

    creqv           crbD,crbA,crbB        Base                                    —

   crnand           crbD,crbA,crbB        Base                                    —

    crnor           crbD,crbA,crbB        Base                                    —

     cror           crbD,crbA,crbB        Base                                    —

    crorc           crbD,crbA,crbB        Base                                    —

    crxor           crbD,crbA,crbB        Base                                    —

    dcba                 rA,rB            Base                                    —

    dcbal                rA,rB            DEO                                     —

    dcbf                 rA,rB            Base                                    —

   dcbfep                rA,rB            E.PD                                    —

    dcbi                 rA,rB         Embedded                                   —

    dcblc               CT,rA,rB          E.CL                                    —

   dcblq.               CT,rA,rB          E.CL                                    —

    dcbst                rA,rB            Base                                    —

   dcbstep               rA,rB            E.PD                                    —

    dcbt               TH,rA,rB           Base                                    —


            EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                         4-81
Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                               Comments

    dcbtep               TH,rA,rB           E.PD                                      —

    dcbtls                CT,rA,rB          E.CL                                      —

    dcbtst                CT,rA,rB          Base                                      —

   dcbtstep              TH,rA,rB           E.PD                                      —

   dcbtstls               CT,rA,rB          E.CL                                      —

       dcbz                rA,rB            Base                                      —

   dcbzep                  rA,rB            E.PD                                      —

       dcbzl               rA,rB            DEO                                       —

   dcbzlep                 rA,rB         E.PD, DEO External PID instruction when DEO implemented.

       divd               rD,rA,rB           64                                       —

       divd.              rD,rA,rB           64                                       —

       divdo              rD,rA,rB           64                                       —

    divdo.                rD,rA,rB           64                                       —

       divdu              rD,rA,rB           64                                       —

    divdu.                rD,rA,rB           64                                       —

    divduo                rD,rA,rB           64                                       —

   divduo.                rD,rA,rB           64                                       —

       divw               rD,rA,rB          Base                                      —

       divw.              rD,rA,rB          Base                                      —

       divwo              rD,rA,rB          Base                                      —

    divwo.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                      —

       divwu              rD,rA,rB          Base                                      —

    divwu.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                      —

   divwuo                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                      —

   divwuo.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                      —

       dnh               DUI,DUIS           E.ED                                      —

       dsn                 rA,rB             DS                                       —

    efdabs                 rD,rA           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efdadd                rD,rA,rB         SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efdcfs                 rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efdcfsf                rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efdcfsi                rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efdcfuf                rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.


              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-82                                                                                             Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                    Instruction Model


                                   Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic             Syntax         Category                               Comments

   efdcfui            rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  efdcmpeq           crD,rA,rB        SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  efdcmpgt           crD,rA,rB        SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  efdcmplt           crD,rA,rB        SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdctsf            rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdctsi            rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdctsiz           rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdctuf            rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdctui            rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdctuiz           rD,rB           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efddiv            rD,rA,rB         SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdmul            rD,rA,rB         SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdnabs            rD,rA           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdneg             rD,rA           SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdsub            rD,rA,rB         SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdtsteq          crD,rA,rB        SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdtstgt          crD,rA,rB        SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efdtstlt          crD,rA,rB        SP.FD     SPE embedded scalar double-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsabs             rD,rA           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsadd            rD,rA,rB         SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efscfsf            rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efscfsi            rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efscfuf            rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efscfui            rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  efscmpeq           crD,rA,rB        SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  efscmpgt           crD,rA,rB        SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  efscmplt           crD,rA,rB        SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsctsf            rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsctsi            rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsctsiz           rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsctuf            rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsctui            rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsctuiz           rD,rB           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                         4-83
Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                               Comments

    efsdiv                rD,rA,rB         SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efsmul                rD,rA,rB         SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efsnabs                 rD,rA           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efsneg                 rD,rA           SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efssub                rD,rA,rB         SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efststeq              crD,rA,rB         SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   efststgt              crD,rA,rB         SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    efststlt             crD,rA,rB         SP.FS     SPE embedded scalar single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    ehpriv                  OC              E.HV                                      —

       eqv                rA,rS,rB          Base                                      —

       eqv.               rA,rS,rB          Base                                      —

       evabs               rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evaddiw              rD,rB,UIMM           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evaddsmiaaw                rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evaddssiaaw                rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evaddumiaaw                rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evaddusiaaw                rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evaddw                 rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evand                 rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evandc                 rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evcmpeq                crD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evcmpgts               crD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evcmpgtu               crD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evcmplts               crD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evcmpltu               crD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evcntlsw                rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evcntlzw                rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evdivws                rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evdivwu                rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

       eveqv              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evextsb                 rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evextsh                 rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evfsabs                 rD,rA           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.


              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-84                                                                                             Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                    Instruction Model


                                   Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic             Syntax         Category                               Comments

   evfsadd           rD,rA,rB         SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfscfsf           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfscfsi           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfscfuf           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfscfui           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

 evfscmpeq           crD,rA,rB        SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

 evfscmpgt           crD,rA,rB        SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  evfscmplt          crD,rA,rB        SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfsctsf           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfsctsi           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  evfsctsiz           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfsctuf           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfsctui           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  evfsctuiz           rD,rB           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfsdiv           rD,rA,rB         SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfsmul           rD,rA,rB         SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  evfsnabs            rD,rA           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.
   evfsneg            rD,rA           SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfssub           rD,rA,rB         SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  evfststeq          crD,rA,rB        SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

  evfststgt          crD,rA,rB        SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

   evfststlt         crD,rA,rB        SP.FV     SPE embedded vector single-precision floating-point. See the SPE PEM.

    evldd            rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evlddepx           rD,rA,rB        SP, E.PD   External PID instruction when SPE implemented.

   evlddx            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evldh            rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evldhx            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evldw            rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evldwx            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evlhhesplat         rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evlhhesplatx         rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evlhhossplat         rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evlhhossplatx        rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                         4-85
Instruction Model


                                    Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic            Syntax          Category                              Comments

evlhhousplat          rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evlhhousplatx         rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evlwhe            rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evlwhex            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evlwhos            rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evlwhosx            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evlwhou            rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evlwhoux            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evlwhsplat          rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evlwhsplatx          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evlwwsplat           rD,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evlwwsplatx          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmergehi           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmergehilo          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmergelo           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmergelohi          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhegsmfaa           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhegsmfan           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhegsmiaa           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhegsmian           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhegumiaa           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhegumian           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmhesmf            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhesmfa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhesmfaaw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhesmfanw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmhesmi            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhesmia            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhesmiaaw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhesmianw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmhessf            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhessfa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhessfaaw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-86                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


                                   Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic             Syntax         Category                              Comments

evmhessfanw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhessiaaw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhessianw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmheumi            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmheumia           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmheumiaaw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmheumianw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmheusiaaw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmheusianw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhogsmfaa          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhogsmfan          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhogsmiaa          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhogsmian          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhogumiaa          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhogumian          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhosmf            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhosmfa           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhosmfaaw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhosmfanw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhosmi            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhosmia           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhosmiaaw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhosmianw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmhossf           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhossfa           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhossfaaw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhossfanw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhossiaaw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhossianw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhoumi            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmhoumia           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhoumiaaw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhoumianw          rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      4-87
Instruction Model


                                    Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic            Syntax          Category                              Comments

evmhousiaaw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmhousianw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evmra              rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwhsmf             rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwhsmfa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmwhsmi            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwhsmia            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmwhssf            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwhssfa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwhumi             rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwhumia            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmwlsmiaaw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmwlsmianw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmwlssiaaw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmwlssianw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmwlumi            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwlumia            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmwlumiaaw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmwlumianw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmwlusiaaw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evmwlusianw           rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmwsmf             rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmwsmfa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwsmfaa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwsmfan            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmwsmi             rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmwsmia            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwsmiaa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwsmian            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evmwssf            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evmwssfa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwssfaa            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwssfan            rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-88                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                   Instruction Model


                                     Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic              Syntax          Category                               Comments

  evmwumi              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwumia              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwumiaa             rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evmwumian             rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evnand              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evneg               rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evnor              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evor               rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evorc              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evrlw              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evrlwi           rD,rA,UIMM           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evrndw               rD,rA             SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evsel            rD,rA,rB,crfS        SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

    evslw              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evslwi            rD,rA,UIMM           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evsplatfi            rD,SIMM            SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evsplati            rD,SIMM            SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evsrwis           rD,rA,UIMM           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evsrwiu           rD,rA,UIMM           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evsrws              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evsrwu              rD,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evstdd              rS,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

 evstddepx             rS,rA,rB        SP, E.PD   External PID instruction when SPE implemented.

   evstddx             rS,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evstdh              rS,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evstdhx             rS,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evstdw              rS,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evstdwx              rS,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evstwhe              rS,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evstwhex             rS,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evstwho              rS,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evstwhox             rS,rA,rB           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evstwwe              rS,d(rA)           SP      SPE. See the SPE PEM.


           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        4-89
Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                              Comments

  evstwwex                rS,rA,rB           SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evstwwo                rS,d(rA)           SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evstwwox                rS,rA,rB           SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evsubfsmiaaw               rD,rA             SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evsubfssiaaw               rD,rA             SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evsubfumiaaw               rD,rA             SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

evsubfusiaaw               rD,rA             SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

   evsubfw                rD,rA,rB           SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

  evsubifw              rD,rB,UIMM           SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

       evxor              rD,rA,rB           SP         SPE. See the SPE PEM.

       extsb               rA,rS            Base                                    —

    extsb.                 rA,rS            Base                                    —

       extsh               rA,rS            Base                                    —

    extsh.                 rA,rS            Base                                    —

       extsw               rA,rS             64                                     —

    extsw.                 rA,rS             64                                     —

       fabs                frD,frB       Floating-poi                               —
                                              nt

       fabs.               frD,frB          FP.R                                    —

       fadd              frD,frA,frB     Floating-poi                               —
                                              nt
       fadd.             frD,frA,frB        FP.R                                    —

       fadds             frD,frA,frB     Floating-poi                               —
                                              nt

    fadds.               frD,frA,frB        FP.R                                    —

       fcfid               frD,frB       Floating-poi                               —
                                              nt

       fcfid.              frD,frB          FP.R                                    —

    fcmpo                crD,frA,frB     Floating-poi                               —
                                              nt

    fcmpu                crD,frA,frB     Floating-poi                               —
                                              nt

       fctid               frD,frB       Floating-poi                               —
                                              nt

       fctid.              frD,frB          FP.R                                    —




              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-90                                                                                          Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                     Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                              Comments

    fctidz               frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

    fctidz.              frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

    fctiw                frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

    fctiw.               frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

    fctiwz               frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

   fctiwz.               frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

     fdiv               frD,frA,frB     Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

     fdiv.              frD,frA,frB        FP.R                                    —

    fdivs               frD,frA,frB     Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

    fdivs.              frD,frA,frB        FP.R                                    —

   fmadd              frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

   fmadd.             frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

   fmadds             frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

   fmadds.            frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

     fmr                 frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

     fmr.                frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

   fmsub              frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

   fmsub.             frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

   fmsubs             frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

   fmsubs.            frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

    fmul                frD,frA,frC     Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

    fmul.               frD,frA,frC        FP.R                                    —

    fmuls               frD,frA,frC     Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt

    fmuls.              frD,frA,frC        FP.R                                    —

    fnabs                frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                             nt


             EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                          4-91
Instruction Model


                                          Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                 Syntax          Category                              Comments

    fnabs.                 frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

       fneg                frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

       fneg.               frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

   fnmadd               frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

   fnmadd.              frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

   fnmadds              frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

  fnmadds.              frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

   fnmsub               frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

   fnmsub.              frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

   fnmsubs              frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

  fnmsubs.              frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

       fres                frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

       fres.               frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

       frsp                frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

       frsp.               frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

    frsqrte                frD,frB        Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

   frsqrte.                frD,frB           FP.R                                    —

       fsel             frD,frA,frC,frB   Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

       fsel.            frD,frA,frC,frB      FP.R                                    —

       fsub               frD,frA,frB     Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

       fsub.              frD,frA,frB        FP.R                                    —

       fsubs              frD,frA,frB     Floating-poi                               —
                                               nt

    fsubs.                frD,frA,frB        FP.R                                    —

       icbi                frA,frB           Base                                    —

    icbiep                  rA,rB            E.PD                                    —

       icblc               CT,rA,rB          E.CL                                    —



               EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-92                                                                                           Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                           Instruction Model


                                      Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic               Syntax          Category                                   Comments

    icblq.              CT,rA,rB          E.CL                                         —

     icbt               CT,rA,rB          Base                                         —

    icbtls              CT,rA,rB          E.CL                                         —

     isel            rD,rA,rB,crbC        Base                                         —

    isync                  —              Base                                         —

    lbarx               rD,rA,rB           ER                                          —

    lbdx                rD,rA,rB           DS                                          —

    lbepx               rD,rA,rB          E.PD                                         —

     lbz                rD,d(rA)          Base                                         —

    lbzu                rD,d(rA)          Base                                         —

    lbzux               rD,rA,rB          Base                                         —

    lbzx                rD,rA,rB          Base                                         —

      ld                rD,d(rA)           64                                          —

    ldarx               rD,rA,rB           64                                          —

    ldbrx               rD,rA,rB           64                                          —

    lddx                rD,rA,rB         64, DS       Decorated storage instruction when 64 implemented.

    ldepx               rD,rA,rB        64, E.PD      External PID instruction when 64 implemented.

     ldu                rD,d(rA)           64                                          —

    ldux                rD,rA,rB           64                                          —

     ldx                rD,rA,rB           64                                          —

     lfd               frD,d(rA)       Floating-poi                                    —
                                            nt

    lfddx              frD,rA,rB       Floating-poi Decorated storage instruction when Floating-point implemented.
                                          nt, DS

   lfdepx              frD,rA,rB       Floating-poi External PID instruction when Floating-point implemented.
                                         nt, E.PD

     lfdu               frD,d(rA)      Floating-poi                                    —
                                            nt

    lfdux              frD,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                    —
                                            nt

     lfdx              frD,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                    —
                                            nt

     lfs                frD,d(rA)      Floating-poi                                    —
                                            nt

     lfsu               frD,d(rA)      Floating-poi                                    —
                                            nt



            EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                4-93
Instruction Model


                                         Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                 Syntax          Category                                      Comments

       lfsux              frD,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                      —
                                               nt

        lfsx              frD,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                      —
                                               nt

        lha                rD,d(rA)          Base                                           —

       lharx               rD,rA,rB           ER                                            —

       lhau                rD,d(rA)          Base                                           —

       lhaux               rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       lhax                rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       lhbrx               rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       lhdx                rD,rA,rB           DS                                            —

       lhepx               rD,rA,rB          E.PD                                           —

        lhz                rD,d(rA)          Base                                           —

       lhzu                rD,d(rA)          Base                                           —

       lhzux               rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       lhzx                rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       lmw                 rD,d(rA)          Base                                           —

       lvebx               vD,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

       lvehx               vD,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

       lvepx               vD,rA,rB         Vector,      External PID instruction when AltiVec implemented.
                                             E.PD

       lvepxl              vD,rA,rB         Vector,      External PID instruction when AltiVec implemented.
                                             E.PD

       lvewx               vD,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

        lvsl               vD,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

        lvsr               vD,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

        lvx                vD,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

        lvxl               vD,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

        lwa                rD,d(rA)           64                                            —

       lwarx               rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       lwaux               rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

       lwax                rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

       lwbrx               rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       lwdx                rD,rA,rB           DS                                            —



               EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-94                                                                                                  Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                   Instruction Model


                                     Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic              Syntax          Category                                      Comments

    lwepx              rD,rA,rB          E.PD                                              —

     lwz               rD,d(rA)          Base                                              —

    lwzu               rD,d(rA)          Base                                              —

    lwzux              rD,rA,rB          Base                                              —

    lwzx               rD,rA,rB          Base                                              —

    mbar                  MO          Embedded                                             —

    mcrf               crD,crfS          Base                                              —

    mcrfs            crD,crfS_FP         Base                                              —

    mcrxr                 crD            Base                                              —

    mfcr                  rD             Base                                              —

    mfdcr             rD,DCRN            E.DC                                              —

    mffs                  frD         Floating-poi                                         —
                                           nt

    mffs.                 frD            FP.R                                              —

   mfmsr                  rD             Base                                              —

   mfocrf              rD,CRM            Base                                              —

   mfpmr              rD,PMRN            E.PM                                              —

    mfspr              rD,SPR            Base                                              —

    mftb               rD,SPR            Base                                              —

   mfvscr                 vD            Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    miso                  —              Base        miso is an alias for or r26,r26,r26

   msgclr                 rB             E.PC                                              —

   msgsnd                 rB             E.PC                                              —

    mtcrf              CRM,rS            Base                                              —

    mtdcr             DCRN,rS            E.DC                                              —

   mtfsb0             crbD_FP         Floating-poi                                         —
                                           nt

   mtfsb0.            crbD_FP            FP.R                                              —
   mtfsb1             crbD_FP         Floating-poi                                         —
                                           nt

   mtfsb1.            crbD_FP            FP.R                                              —

    mtfsf               FM,fB         Floating-poi                                         —
                                           nt

    mtfsf.              FM,fB            FP.R                                              —



           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        4-95
Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                                      Comments

       mtfsfi         crD_FP,FP_IMM      Floating-poi                                      —
                                              nt

    mtfsfi.           crD_FP,FP_IMM         FP.R                                           —

    mtmsr                   rS              Base                                           —

    mtocrf                CRM,rS            Base                                           —

    mtpmr                PMRN,rS            E.PM                                           —

       mtspr              SPR,rS            Base                                           —

    mtvscr                  vB             Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    mulhd                 rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

    mulhd.                rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

   mulhdu                 rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

   mulhdu.                rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

    mulhw                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

   mulhw.                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

   mulhwu                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

   mulhwu.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       mulld              rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

    mulld.                rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

    mulldo                rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

   mulldo.                rD,rA,rB           64                                            —

       mulli            rD,rA,SIMM          Base                                           —

       mullw              rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

    mullw.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

   mullwo                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

   mullwo.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                           —

       nand               rA,rS,rB          Base                                           —

       nand.              rA,rS,rB          Base                                           —

        neg                rD,rA            Base                                           —

       neg.                rD,rA            Base                                           —

       nego                rD,rA            Base                                           —

       nego.               rD,rA            Base                                           —

        nor               rA,rS,rB          Base                                           —

       nor.               rA,rS,rB          Base                                           —



              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-96                                                                                               Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                    Instruction Model


                                      Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic               Syntax          Category                              Comments

      or                rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

     or.                rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

     orc                rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

     orc.               rA,rS,rB          Base                                    —

     ori              rA,rS,UIMM          Base                                    —

     oris             rA,rS,UIMM          Base                                    —

  popcntb                 rA,rS           Base                                    —

  popcntd                 rA,rS            64                                     —

  popcntw                rA,rS            Base                                    —

    prtyd                rA,rS             64                                     —

    prtyw                 rA,rS           Base                                    —

     rfci                  —           Embedded                                   —

     rfdi                  —              E.ED                                    —

     rfgi                  —              E.HV                                    —

      rfi                  —           Embedded                                   —

    rfmci                  —           Embedded                                   —

    rldcl             rA,rS,rB,MB          64                                     —

    rldcl.            rA,rS,rB,MB          64                                     —

    rldcr             rA,rS,rB,ME          64                                     —

    rldcr.            rA,rS,rB,ME          64                                     —

    rldic             rA,rS,SH,MB          64                                     —

    rldic.            rA,rS,SH,MB          64                                     —

    rldicl            rA,rS,SH,MB          64                                     —

    rldicl.           rA,rS,SH,MB          64                                     —

    rldicr            rA,rS,SH,ME          64                                     —

    rldicr.           rA,rS,SH,ME          64                                     —

    rldimi            rA,rS,SH,MB          64                                     —

   rldimi.            rA,rS,SH,MB          64                                     —

    rlwimi          rA,rS,SH,MB,ME        Base                                    —

   rlwimi.          rA,rS,SH,MB,ME        Base                                    —

   rlwinm           rA,rS,SH,MB,ME        Base                                    —

   rlwinm.          rA,rS,SH,MB,ME        Base                                    —

   rlwnm            rA,rS,rB,MB,ME        Base                                    —


            EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                         4-97
Instruction Model


                                         Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                 Syntax          Category                                Comments

    rlwnm.             rA,rS,rB,MB,ME        Base                                      —

        sc                   LEV             Base                                      —

        sld                rA,rS,rB           64                                       —

        sld.               rA,rS,rB           64                                       —

        slw                rA,rS,rB          Base                                      —

        slw.               rA,rS,rB          Base                                      —

       srad                rA,rS,rB           64                                       —

       srad.               rA,rS,rB           64                                       —

       sradi              rA,rS,SH            64                                       —

       sradi.             rA,rS,SH            64                                       —

       sraw                rA,rS,rB          Base                                      —

       sraw.               rA,rS,rB          Base                                      —

       srawi              rA,rS,SH           Base                                      —

       srawi.             rA,rS,SH           Base                                      —

        srd                rA,rS,rB           64                                       —

        srd.               rA,rS,rB           64                                       —

        srw                rA,rS,rB          Base                                      —

       srw.                rA,rS,rB          Base                                      —

        stb                rS,d(rA)          Base                                      —

    stbcx.                 rS,rA,rB           ER                                       —

       stbdx               rS,rA,rB           DS                                       —

    stbepx                 rS,rA,rB          E.PD                                      —

       stbu                rS,d(rA)          Base                                      —

       stbux               rS,rA,rB          Base                                      —

       stbx                rS,rA,rB          Base                                      —

        std                rS,d(rA)           64                                       —

    stdbrx                 rS,rA,rB           64                                       —

    stdcx.                 rS,rA,rB           64                                       —

       stddx               rS,rA,rB         64, DS    Decorated storage instruction when 64 implemented.

    stdepx                 rS,rA,rB        64, E.PD   External PID instruction when 64 implemented.

       stdu                rS,d(rA)           64                                       —

       stdux               rS,rA,rB           64                                       —

       stdx                rS,rA,rB           64                                       —


               EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-98                                                                                              Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                           Instruction Model


                                      Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic               Syntax          Category                                      Comments

     stfd               frS,d(rA)      Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

   stfddx              frS,rA,rB       Floating-poi Decorated storage instruction when Floating-point implemented.
                                          nt, DS

   stfdepx             frS,rA,rB       Floating-poi External PID instruction when Floating-point implemented.
                                         nt, E.PD

    stfdu               frS,d(rA)      Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

   stfdux              frS,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

    stfdx              frS,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

    stfiwx             frS,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

     stfs               frS,d(rA)      Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

    stfsu               frS,d(rA)      Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

   stfsux              frS,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

    stfsx              frS,rA,rB       Floating-poi                                      —
                                            nt

     sth                rS,d(rA)          Base                                           —

   sthbrx               rS,rA,rB          Base                                           —

    sthcx.              rS,rA,rB           ER                                            —

    sthdx               rS,rA,rB           DS                                            —

   sthepx               rS,rA,rB          E.PD                                           —

    sthu                rS,d(rA)          Base                                           —

    sthux               rS,rA,rB          Base                                           —

    sthx                rS,rA,rB          Base                                           —

    stmw                rS,d(rA)          Base                                           —

   stvebx               vS,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   stvehx               vS,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   stvepx               vS,rA,rB         Vector,      External PID instruction when AltiVec implemented.
                                          E.PD

   stvepxl              vS,rA,rB         Vector,      External PID instruction when AltiVec implemented.
                                          E.PD

   stvewx               vS,rA,rB         Vector       AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.


            EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                4-99
Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                                   Comments

     stvx                 vS,rA,rB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     stvxl                vS,rA,rB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

        stw               rS,d(rA)          Base                                        —

    stwbrx                rS,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    stwcx.                rS,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    stwdx                 rS,rA,rB           DS                                         —

   stwepx                 rS,rA,rB          E.PD                                        —

     stwu                 rS,d(rA)          Base                                        —

    stwux                 rS,rA,rB          Base                                        —

     stwx                 rS,rA,rB          Base                                        —

     subf                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

     subf.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfc                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfc.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfco                rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

   subfco.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfe                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfe.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfeo                rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

   subfeo.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfic              rD,rA,SIMM          Base                                        —

   subfme                  rD,rA            Base                                        —

   subfme.                 rD,rA            Base                                        —

   subfmeo                 rD,rA            Base                                        —

  subfmeo.                 rD,rA            Base                                        —

    subfo                 rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfo.                rD,rA,rB          Base                                        —

    subfze                 rD,rA            Base                                        —

   subfze.                 rD,rA            Base                                        —

   subfzeo                 rD,rA            Base                                        —

   subfzeo.                rD,rA            Base                                        —




              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-100                                                                                           Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                   Instruction Model


                                     Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic              Syntax          Category                                   Comments

     sync                 L              Base                                        —
   (msync)
   (lwsync)
  (hwsync)


      td               TO,rA,rB           64                                         —

     tdi             TO,rA,SIMM           64                                         —

    tlbilx             T,rA,rB           E.HV                                        —

   tlbivax              rA,rB         Embedded                                       —

    tlbre                 —           Embedded                                       —

    tlbsx               rA,rB         Embedded                                       —

   tlbsync                —           Embedded                                       —

    tlbwe                 —           Embedded                                       —

     tw                TO,rA,rB          Base                                        —

     twi             TO,rA,SIMM          Base                                        —

  vaddcuw             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vaddfp             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vaddsbs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vaddshs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vaddsws             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vaddubm             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vaddubs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vadduhm             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.
  vadduhs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vadduwm             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vadduws             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vand              vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vandc             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vavgsb             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vavgsh             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vavgsw             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vavgub             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vavguh             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vavguw             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.



           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-101
Instruction Model


                                    Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic            Syntax          Category                                   Comments

    vcfsx           vD,vB,UIMM         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vcfux           vD,vB,UIMM         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vcmpbfpx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vcmpbfpx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpeqfpx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpeqfpx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpequbx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpequbx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpequhx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpequhx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpequwx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

vcmpequwx.           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgefpx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgefpx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vcmpgtfpx          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtfpx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtsbx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtsbx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtshx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtshx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtswx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtswx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtubx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtubx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtuhx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtuhx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtuwx           vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vcmpgtuwx.          vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vctsxs          vD,vB,UIMM         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vctuxs          vD,vB,UIMM         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vexptefp            vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vlogefp             vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmaddfp          vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-102                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Instruction Model


                                   Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic             Syntax         Category                                   Comments

   vmaxfp            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmaxsb            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmaxsh            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmaxsw            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmaxub            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmaxuh            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vmaxuw             vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vmhaddshs         vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

vmhraddshs         vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vminfp            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vminsb            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vminsh            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vminsw            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vminub            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vminuh            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vminuw            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vmladduhm         vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmrghb            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmrghh            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmrghw            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmrglb            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmrglh            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmrglw            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

vmsummbm           vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vmsumshm          vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vmsumshs          vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vmsumubm          vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vmsumuhm          vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vmsumuhs          vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vmulesb            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vmulesh            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vmuleub            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vmuleuh            vD,vA,vB         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     4-103
Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                                   Comments

   vmulosb               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmulosh               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmuloub               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vmulouh               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vnmsubfp              vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vnor                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

        vor              vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vperm               vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vpkpx                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vpkshss               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vpkshus               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vpkswss               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vpkswus               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vpkuhum                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vpkuhus               vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vpkuwum                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vpkuwus                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vrefp                 vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vrfim                 vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vrfin                 vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vrfip                 vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vrfiz                 vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vrlb                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vrlh                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vrlw                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vrsqrtefp                vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vsel               vD,vA,vB,vC        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

        vsl              vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vslb                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vsldoi             vD,vA,vB,SHB        Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vslh                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vslo                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vslw                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.


              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-104                                                                                           Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                   Instruction Model


                                     Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

 Mnemonic              Syntax          Category                                   Comments

   vspltb            vD,vB,UIMM         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vsplth            vD,vB,UIMM         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vspltisb           vD,UIMM           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vspltish           vD,UIMM           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vspltisw            vD,UIMM           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vspltw            vD,vB,UIMM         Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vsr              vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vsrab             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vsrah             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vsraw             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vsrb              vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vsrh              vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vsro              vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

    vsrw              vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsubcuw             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vsubfp             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsubsbs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsubshs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsubsws             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsububm             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsububs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsubuhm             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsubuhs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsubuwm             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsubuws             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vsum2sws             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vsum4sbs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vsum4shs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

 vsum4ubs             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vsumsws             vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vupkhpx               vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vupkhsb               vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

  vupkhsh               vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.


           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       4-105
Instruction Model


                                        Table 4-54. Instruction Set (continued)

  Mnemonic                Syntax          Category                                   Comments

   vupklpx                 vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vupklsb                 vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

   vupklsh                 vD,vB           Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     vxor                vD,vA,vB          Vector    AltiVec. See the AltiVec PEM.

     wait                   —               WT                                          —

    wrtee                   rS           Embedded                                       —

    wrteei                   E           Embedded                                       —

        xor               rA,rS,rB          Base                                        —

     xor.                 rA,rS,rB          Base                                        —

     xori               rA,rS,UIMM          Base                                        —

     xoris              rA,rS,UIMM          Base                                        —




              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
4-106                                                                                           Freescale Semiconductor