Chapter 6
Cache and MMU Architecture
This chapter describes the cache and MMU architecture for Freescale embedded devices. It is organized
into the following sections:
    • Section 6.1, “Cache and MMU Architecture Overview”
    • Section 6.2, “Cache Model”
    • Section 6.3, “Special Cache Management Functionality”
    • Section 6.4, “Memory and Cache Coherency”
    • Section 6.5, “MMU Architecture”
It focuses on how Freescale devices manage cache implementations and memory translation and
protection. Note, however, that cache and MMU implementations vary from device to device, particularly
with respect to the implementation of the caches and TLBs. For more information, refer to the core
reference manuals.
This chapter also describes additional functionality that is defined by the architecture and may be
implemented on Freescale cores, such as the following:
   • Cache Line Locking <E.CL>
   • Cache Way Partitioning <CWP>
   • External PID load and store <E.PD>
   • Decorated storage <DS>
   • Direct Cache Flushing <DCF>
   • Data cache block extended operations <DEO>
This functionality may be implemented independently of each other; however, an implementation is likely
to include more than one. Consult the core documentation.
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                This manual describes some architected features in a very general way that
                does not include some details that are important to the programmer. There
                are also small differences in how some features are defined and how they
                are implemented. For implementation-specific details, see the user
                documentation.
                Throughout this chapter, references to load instructions include cache
                management and other instructions that are stated in the instruction
                descriptions to be treated as a load, and references to store instructions
                include the cache management and other instructions that are treated as a
                store.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                   6-1
Cache and MMU Architecture


6.1       Cache and MMU Architecture Overview
The architecture cache and memory models support a wide variety of implementations. To provide such
flexibility, some features are defined very generally, leaving specific details up to the implementation.
To ensure consistency among Freescale devices, EIS defines more specific implementation standards for
cache and memory models. However, these standards still leave some details up to individual
implementations. Programmers should still consult the core reference manual for additional
implementation specific details.
The architectural definition of the cache model consists primarily of a framework that assumes weakly
ordered memory and defines instructions and register resources that support Harvard or unified cache
designs in configurations that may include both types, typically a Harvard-style L1 cache structure often
with a unified L2 cache.
For example, the architecture provides separate instructions for invalidating instruction and data caches,
and likewise separate cache touch instructions that can be used to hint that an instruction or data cache
block is likely to be used soon. See Section 6.2.3, “Cache Control Instructions.”
EIS provides registers for configuring and managing L1 and L2 caches, which are described in detail in
Section 3.10, “L1 Cache Registers,” and Section 3.11, “L2 Cache Registers.”
Many aspects of the cache implementation are affected by the MMU model, in particular the memory
coherency attributes (described in Section 6.4.1, “Memory/Cache Access Attributes (WIMGE Bits)”).
The MMU model for embedded devices assumes that translation is always enabled (there is no real mode)
and that memory is configured into pages, for which translation and permission attributes are configured
by software through TLBs using instructions and registers defined for that purpose by the architecture.
The architecture supports demand-paged virtual memory as well as a variety of other management
schemes that depend on precise control of effective-to-real address translation and flexible memory
protection. Address translation misses and protection faults cause precise exceptions. Sufficient
information is available to correct the fault and restart the faulting instruction.
Each program on a 64-bit or 32-bit implementation can access 264 or 232 bytes of effective address (EA)
space, subject to limitations imposed by the operating system. Typically, each program’s EA space is a
subset of a larger virtual address (VA) space managed by the operating system. The architecture also
provides support for addressing real address (RA) space between 32 and 64 bits. The size of the real
address space is independent of whether the processor is a 32-bit or 64-bit implementation. Many 32-bit
implementations provide access to more than 32 bits of real address space. Consult the user
documentation.
<Embedded.Hypervisor>:
Implementations that provide category E.HV also provide logical addresses (LA). The LA is translated to
a physical address by hypervisor software when a TLB entry is written in guest state. Logical addresses
are what the guest OS views as real addresses, but are translated to true real addresses.
Each effective address is translated to a real address before being used to access real memory or an I/O
device. Hardware does this by using the address translation mechanism described in Section 6.5.4,



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-2                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


“Address Translation.” The operating system (and hypervisor <E.HV>) manage the physically addressed
resources of the system by setting up the tables used by the address translation mechanism.
The architecture divides the effective address space into pages. The page represents the granularity of
effective address translation, permission control, and memory/cache attributes. Multiple page sizes may
be simultaneously supported. For an effective-to-real address translation to exist, a valid entry for the page
containing the effective address must be in a translation lookaside buffer (TLB). Addresses for which no
TLB entry exists cause TLB miss exceptions (instruction or data TLB error interrupts).
                                  NOTE: Software Considerations
                Implementations may support only a subset of the available page sizes or
                may have TLB array that only support a fixed size page. See the core
                reference manual.

6.2       Cache Model
The cache model defines resources for L1 and L2 caches, which are described as follows:
   • L1 caches may separate instruction and data caches into two separate structures (commonly known
       as Harvard architecture), or they may provide a unified cache combining instructions and data.
       Caches are physically tagged.
       Some L1 caches may be implemented as write-through in conjunction with a secondary cache. In
       this case, modified data exists only in the secondary cache.
   • Secondary (L2) caches are generally organized as a unified cache, that is, combining instructions
       and data although they may behave as a Harvard cache by tracking which cache lines are allocated
       by instruction or data references. Caches are physically tagged. Secondary caches are required to
       support the coherency mechanisms of the core and the primary caches.
       Secondary caches are defined to be strictly managed by the processor core and are implemented as
       a direct part of the core programming model. These may include, but are not limited to, backside
       and inline caches.
       An integrated device may have other caches or cache-like objects that may generate processor core
       accesses to the memory subsystem. Such caches are not considered part of the core cache
       programming model and are architected as system-level blocks. These may include, but are not
       limited to, front lookaside caches.
       Secondary caches may have many different features and capabilities. The architecture does not
       explicitly state which features are required, but provides a register programming model that must
       be followed if certain features are implemented. Thus, an implementation may provide additional
       features and controls beyond what is described here.
       The L2 cache programming model defines a set of SPRs for configuration and control, described
       in Section 3.11, “L2 Cache Registers.” Note that some Freescale cores use device control registers,
       DCRs, for this purpose. Section 3.18, “Device Control Registers (DCRs),” provides a general
       description of these registers, which the architecture defines only as a general resource. Specific
       information is provided in the core documentation.

6.2.1        Storage Attributes and Coherency
L1 data caches support storage attributes defined with the following advisory:

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-3
Cache and MMU Architecture


      •    The primary data cache may be implemented not to snoop (that is, not coherent with transactions
           outside the processor). System software is then responsible to maintain coherency. Thus the setting
           of the M attribute is meaningless. The preferred implementation provides snooping for primary
           data caches.
L1 instruction caches must support the architecture-define storage attributes with the following advisory:
    • The guarded attribute should be ignored for instruction fetch accesses. To prevent speculative fetch
        accesses to guarded memory, software should mark those pages as no-execute.
    • The cache may be implemented not to snoop (that is, not coherent with transactions outside the
        processor). System software is then responsible to maintain coherency. The preferred
        implementation does not provide snooping for primary instruction caches.

6.2.2              Cache Identifiers and CT Values
Cache identifiers and CT values are used to identify caches to perform cache operations. CT values are the
values specified in the CT or TH instruction fields which are used to identify a particular cache in the cache
hierarchy. Cache identifiers are used by external devices to identify a particular cache in the SoC which
may or may not be a part of a core’s cache hierarchy. Logically, cache identifiers and CT values do not
share the same exact namespace. CT values are defined here by EIS. CT values that identify a particular
cache are not necessarily the same as the cache identifier for the same cache.
Caches in a system may be specific targets of “cache stashing.” Cache stashing is an operation initiated by
another device in the system, specifying a hint that specified addresses should be prefetched into a target
cache. The target cache for such an operation is called a “cache identifier.” Each cache in the system that
responds to such requests has a cache identifier set by system software or predefined by hardware. For the
primary data cache of a processor, the identifier is defined in L1CSR2[DCSTASHID]. For the secondary
data cache of the processor (the backside or L2 cache), the identifier is defined in L2CSR1[L2STASHID].
A value of 0 set for a cache identifier indicates that cache stashing operations will not be accepted or
performed by the cache.
Instructions having a CT (Cache Target) or TH field for specifying a specific cache hierarchy such as dcbt,
dcbtst, dcbtls <E.CL>, dcbtstls <E.CL>, dcblc <E.CL>, icbtls <E.CL>, icblc <E.CL>, and icbt use the
values in the following table to identify target caches:
                                         Table 6-1. CT Values and Target Cache

          CT Value                                                 Target Cache

             0        Primary data cache (or unified primary cache) of the processor executing the instruction. This value may
                      not be used as a cache identifier in an external cache operation (stash) as it is implicit.

             1        The I/O cache (platform cache). Defined by the SoC architecture.

             2        Secondary (L2) data cache of the processor executing the instruction. This value may not be used as a
                      cache identifier in an external cache operation as it is implicit.

           3,5,7      Available for use as a cache identifier in an external cache operation.

            4,6       Reserved. Not available for use as a cache identifier in an external cache operation.

            8-31      Reserved. Not available for use as a cache identifier in an external cache operation. Defined by
                      PowerISA for streaming prefetch control.


            EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-4                                                                                                    Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                Software should avoid assigning cache identifiers 1, 2, 4, and 6 as such
                values already have predefined targets or may be assigned by the
                architecture in the future.

6.2.3        Cache Control Instructions
The architecture defines instructions for controlling both the instruction and data caches (when they exist).
   • Data Cache Block Touch (dcbt)
   • Data Cache Block Touch for Store (dcbtst)
   • Data Cache Block Zero (dcbz, dcbzl <DEO>, dcbzep <E.PD>, dcbzlep <E.PD,DEO>)
   • Data Cache Block Store (dcbst, dcbstep <E.PD>)
   • Data Cache Block Flush (dcbf)
   • Data Cache Block Allocate (dcba, dcbal <DEO>)
   • Data Cache Block Invalidate (dcbi)
   • Instruction Cache Block Invalidate (icbi, icbiep <E.PD>)
   • Instruction Cache Block Touch (icbt)
These instructions are described in Section 4.6.1.17.2, “User-Level Cache Management Instructions,” and
Section 4.6.2.2.1, “Supervisor-Level Cache Management Instructions.”
Cache locking adds the following instructions <E.CL>:
   • Data Cache Block Lock Clear (dcblc)
   • Data Cache Block Touch and Lock Set (dcbtls)
   • Data Cache Block Touch for Store and Lock Set (dcbtstls)
   • Data Cache Block Lock Query (dcblq.)
   • Instruction Cache Block Lock Clear (icblc)
   • Instruction Cache Block Touch and Lock Set (icbtls)
   • Instruction Cache Block Lock Query (icblq.)
Cache locking is described in Section 6.3.1, “Cache Line Locking <E.CL>.”

6.3       Special Cache Management Functionality
The following sections describe special cache management features. Consult the user documentation to
determine whether these features are implemented.

6.3.1        Cache Line Locking <E.CL>
The cache line locking facility defines instructions and methods for locking cache lines for frequently used
instructions and data. Cache locking allows software to instruct the cache to keep latency sensitive data
readily available for fast access. This is accomplished by marking individual cache lines (or blocks) as
locked.

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-5
Cache and MMU Architecture


A locked line differs from a normal line in that lines that are locked in the cache do not participate in the
normal replacement policy when a line must be victimized for replacement.

6.3.1.1        Cache Line Lock Set, Query, and Clear Instructions
This section describes the cache locking instructions, which are summarized in Section 4.6.1.17.3, “Cache
Locking Instructions <E.CL>” and Chapter 5, “Instruction Set.” Lines are locked into the cache by
software using a series of touch and lock set instructions.
MSR[UCLE], the user-mode cache lock enable bit, determines whether cache line locking instructions can
be executed in user mode. If UCLE = 0, any cache lock instruction executed in user-mode causes a
cache-locking exception and data storage interrupt and sets either ESR[DLK] or ESR[ILK]. This allows
the operating system to manage and track the locking/unlocking of cache lines by user-mode tasks. See
Section 6.3.1.2.3, “Mode Restricted Cache Locking Exceptions.”
If UCLE = 1, cache-locking instructions can be executed in user-mode and they do not take a DSI for
cache-locking (although they may still take a data storage interrupt for access violations).
<Embedded.Hypervisor>:
MSRP[UCLEP], the MSR[UCLE] protect bit, determines whether the guest operating system can execute
cache locking instruction or change the value of MSR[UCLE]. When MSRP[UCLEP] is set, an attempt to
execute a cache locking instruction while in guest supervisor state causes an embedded hypervisor
privilege exception. MSR[UCLEP] does not affect whether unprivileged software can execute cache
locking instructions which is still controlled by MSR[UCLE].
The following instructions are provided to lock data items into the data and instruction cache:
   • dcbtls—Data cache block touch and lock set
   • dcbtstls—Data cache block touch for store and lock set
   • icbtls—Instruction cache block touch and lock set
The rA and rB operands to these instructions form an effective address identifying the line to be locked.
The CT field indicates which cache in the cache hierarchy should be targeted. These instructions are
similar to the dcbt, dcbtst, and icbt instructions, but locking instructions cannot execute speculatively and
may cause additional exceptions. For unified caches, both the instruction lock set and the data lock set
target the same cache.
Similarly, lines are unlocked from the cache by software using a series of lock clear instructions. The
following instructions are provided to clear locks in the instruction and data cache:
    • dcblc—Data cache block lock clear.
    • icblc—Instruction cache block lock clear.
The rA and rB operands to these instructions form an effective address identifying the line to be unlocked.
The CT field indicates which cache in the cache hierarchy should be targeted.
The status of whether a line is locked or not can be queried on some processors using a series of lock query
instructions. The following instructions are provided to determine whether a line is locked in the
instruction and data cache:
    • dcblq.—Data cache block lock query.

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-6                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


    •   icblq.—Instruction cache block lock query.
The rA and rB operands to these instructions form an effective address identifying the line to be queried.
The CT field indicates which cache in the cache hierarchy should be targeted. Processors that implement
lock query instructions do not post status of locking operations in L2CSR0 or L2CSR1.
Additionally, software may clear all the locks in the cache. For the primary cache, this is accomplished by
setting the lock flash clear bits. See Section 3.10.1, “L1 Cache Control and Status Register 0 (L1CSR0),”
and Section 3.10.2, “L1 Cache Control and Status Register 1 (L1CSR1).”
Cache lines may also be implicitly unlocked anytime the data in the line is invalidated. The following ways
illustrate how such an invalidation may occur:
    • A locked line is invalidated by an dcbi, dcbf, icbi, or icbiep <E.PD> instruction that targets the
         line.
    • A snoop hit on a locked line can require the line to be invalidated if the data has been modified
         external to the processor or if another processor explicitly invalidated the line.
    • The entire cache containing the locked line is invalidated.
    • The cores coherency implementation requires that the line be invalidated.
An implementation is not required to unlock lines if data is invalidated in the cache. Although the data may
be invalidated (and thus not be present in the cache), it is still possible for the cache to keep the lock
associated with that cache line present and when the next access occurs to fill the line from the memory
subsystem. If the implementation does not clear locks when the associated line is invalidated, the method
of locking is said to be persistent.

6.3.1.2        Error Conditions
Setting locks in the cache can fail for a variety of reasons. An address specified with a lock set instruction
that does not have the proper permission will cause a data storage interrupt. Cache locking addresses are
always translated as data references, therefore icbtls instructions that fail to translate or fail permissions
cause DTLB and DSI exceptions respectively. Additionally, cache locking and clearing operations can fail
due to restricted user mode (or guest supervisor mode <E.HV>) access. See Section 6.3.1.2.3, “Mode
Restricted Cache Locking Exceptions.”

6.3.1.2.1        Overlocking
If no exceptions occur for the execution of an dcbtls, dcbtstls, or icbtls instruction, an attempt is made to
lock the corresponding cache line. If all of the available ways are locked in the given cache set, the
requested line is not locked. This is considered an overlocking situation, and if the lock was targeted for
the primary cache (CT = 0), L1CSR0[DCLO] (or L1CSR1[ICLO] if icbtls) is set appropriately. If the lock
targeted the secondary cache (CT = 2), L2CSR[L2LO] is set.
A processor may optionally allow victimizing a locked line in an overlocking situation. If
L1CSR0[DCLOA] (L1CSR0[ICLOA] for the primary instruction cache, L2CSR[L2CLOA] for the
secondary cache) is set an overlocking condition will result in the replacement of an existing locked line
with the requested line. Selection of the line to replace in an overlocking situation is implementation



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       6-7
Cache and MMU Architecture


dependent. The overlocking condition is still said to exist and is appropriately reflected in the status bits
for lock overflow.
An attempt to lock a line which is already established and valid does not cause an overlocking condition.
A non–lock setting cache line fill or line replacement request to a cache that has all ways locked for a given
set, does not cause a lock to be cleared.

6.3.1.2.2       Unable to Lock Conditions
If no exceptions occur and no overlocking condition exists, an attempt to set a lock can fail if any of the
following is true:
    • The target address is marked cache-inhibited, or the storage attributes of the address uses a
        coherency protocol that does not support locking.
    • The target cache is disabled or not present.
    • The CT field of the instructions contains a value not supported by the implementation.
    • Any other implementation-specific error condition.
If an unable-to-lock condition occurs, the lock set instruction is treated as a no-op. If the lock targets the
data cache (dcbtls, dcbtstls) in processors that do not implement lock query (icblq. and dcblq.)
instructions, L1CSR0[DCUL] is set to indicate the unable-to-lock condition. If the lock is targeted for the
instruction cache (icbtls) in processors that do not implement lock query instructions, L1CSR1[ICUL] is
set to indicate the unable-to-lock condition. L1CSR0[DCUL] or L1CSR1[ICUL] is set regardless of the
CT value in the lock setting instruction.
Processors that implement lock query instruction (dcblq. and icblq.) do not report unable-to-lock
conditions. Instead software should query the lock status after performing the lock set operation.

6.3.1.2.3       Mode Restricted Cache Locking Exceptions
Cache locking can be restricted to supervisor mode only access. Setting MSR[UCLE] allows cache
locking operations to be performed in user mode. If MSR[UCLE] = 0 and MSR[PR] = 1 and execution of
a cache lock or cache lock clear instruction occurs, a cache locking exception occurs, and the processor
suppresses execution of the instruction causing the exception. If the exception is the highest priority
exception, a data storage interrupt is taken and ESR is set as follows:
    • ESR[DLK] is set if the instruction was a dcbtls, dcbtstls, dcblq., or a dcblc.
    • ESR[ILK] is set if the instruction was a icbtls, icblq., or a icblc.
    • All other ESR bits are cleared.
<Embedded.Hypervisor>:
Cache locking can be restricted to hypervisor mode only access. Setting MSRP[UCLEP] prevents guest
supervisor mode from executing cache locking instructions. If MSRP[UCLEP] = 1 and MSR[PR] = 0 and
execution of a cache lock or cache lock clear instruction occurs, an embedded hypervisor privilege
exception occurs, and the processor suppresses execution of the instruction causing the exception. If the
exception is the highest priority exception, an embedded hypervisor privilege interrupt is taken. The
setting of MSRP[UCLEP] has no effect on user mode execution of cache locking instructions.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-8                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


                                           NOTE: Virtualization
                Since MSRP[UCLEP] has no effect on user mode execution of cache
                locking instructions, the hypervisor should ensure that MSR[UCLE] is not
                set in the guest to prevent user mode from executing cache locking
                instructions.

6.3.2        Direct Cache Flushing <DCF>
To assist in software flush of the L1 cache, the direct cache flushing allows the programmer to flush and/or
invalidate the cache by specifying the cache set and cache way. Without such a feature, the programmer
must do one of the following:
    • Know the virtual addresses of the lines that need to be flushed and issue dcbst or dcbf instructions
        to those addresses.
    • Flush the entire cache by causing all the lines to be replaced. This requires a virtual address range
        that is mapped as a contiguous physical address range, that the programmer knows and can
        manipulate the replacement policy of the cache, and the size and organization of the cache.
With direct cache flushing, the program needs only to specify the way and set of the cache to flush.
The direct cache flushing available bit, L1CFG0[CFISWA], is set for implementations that support this
functionality.
The direct cache flush facility defines the L1 flush and invalidate control register 0 (L1FINV0), described
in Section 3.10.8, “L1 Flush and Invalidate Control Register 0 (L1FINV0) <DCF>.” To address a specific
physical block of the cache, the L1 flush and invalidate control register 0 (L1FINV0) is written with the
cache set (L1FINV0[CSET]) and cache way (L1FINV0[CWAY]) of the line that is to be flushed. L1FINV0
is written using a mtspr instruction specifying the L1FINV0 register. No tag match in the cache is
required. An additional field, L1FINV0[CCMD], is used to specify the type of flush to be performed on
the line addressed by L1FINV0[CWAY] and L1FINV0[CSET].
The available L1FINV0[CCMD] encodings are described in Section 3.10.8, “L1 Flush and Invalidate
Control Register 0 (L1FINV0) <DCF>.”
Direct cache flushing affects only the L1 data cache (or unified cache); the L1 instruction cache and any
other caches in the cache hierarchy are not explicitly targeted.

6.3.3        Cache Way Partitioning <CWP>
Cache way partitioning allows ways in a unified L1 cache to be configured to accept either data or
instruction miss line-fill replacements and is implemented with bits in L1CSR0 and L1CFG0:
    • Way instruction disable field (L1CSR0[WID]) is a 4-bit field that determines which of ways 0–3
        are available for replacement by instruction miss line refills.
        The additional ways instruction disable bit (L1CSR0[AWID]) determines whether ways 4 and
        above are available for replacement by instruction miss line refills.
    • Way data disable field (L1CSR0[WDD]) is a 4-bit field that determines which of ways 0–3 are
        available for replacement by data miss line refills.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-9
Cache and MMU Architecture


           The additional ways data disable bit (L1CSR0[AWDD]) determines whether ways 4 and above are
           available for replacement by instruction miss line refills.
       •   Way access mode bit, L1CSR0[WAM], Determines whether all ways are available for access or
           only ways partitioned for the specific type of access are used for a fetch or read operation.
       •   Cache way partitioning available bit, L1CFG0[CWPA], indicates whether the cache way
           partitioning is available.
These fields are described in detail in Section 3.10.1, “L1 Cache Control and Status Register 0 (L1CSR0).”
and in Section 3.10.6, “L1 Cache Configuration Register 0 (L1CFG0).”

6.3.3.1         Interaction with Cache Locking Operations
Cache way partitioning can affect the ability of cache line locking to control replacement of lines. If any
cache line locking instruction (icbtls, dcbtls, dcbtstls) is allowed to execute and finds a matching line in
the cache, the line’s lock bit is set regardless of the L1CSR0[WID,AWID,WDD,AWDD] settings. In this
case, no replacement has been made.
However, for cache misses that occur while executing a cache line lock set instruction, the only candidate
lines available for locking are those that correspond to ways of the cache that have not been disabled for
the particular type of line locking instruction (controlled by WDD and AWDD for dcbtls and dcbtstls,
controlled by WID and AWID for icbtls). Thus, an overlocking condition may result even though fewer
than eight lines with the same index are locked.

6.4          Memory and Cache Coherency
The primary objective of a coherent memory system is to provide the same image of memory to all devices
using the system. Enforcing coherency allows synchronization and cooperative use of shared resources.
Otherwise, multiple copies of data corresponding to a memory location, some containing outdated values,
could exist in a system and could cause errors when the outdated values are used. Each memory-sharing
device must follow rules for managing cache state. This section describes the coherency mechanisms of
the architecture and the cache coherency protocols that the Freescale devices support.
Unless specifically noted, the discussion of coherency in this section applies to the core data cache only.
The instruction cache is not snooped for general coherency with other caches; however, it is snooped when
the Instruction Cache Block Invalidate (icbi, icbiep <E.PD>) instruction is executed by this processor or
any processor in the system.

6.4.1          Memory/Cache Access Attributes (WIMGE Bits)
Some memory characteristics can be set on a page basis by using the WIMGE bits in the translation
lookaside buffer (TLB) entries. These bits allow both uniprocessor and multiprocessor system designs to
exploit numerous system-level performance optimizations. WIMGE bits control the following:
   • Write-through required (W bit)
   • Caching-inhibited (I bit)
   • Memory-coherency-required (M bit)
   • Guarded (G bit)

           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-10                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


    •   Endianness (E bit)
In addition to the WIMGE bits, the MMU model defines the following attributes on a page basis:
    • User-definable (U0, U1, U2, U3). These bits, progammable through MAS3[54–57], are associated
        with a TLB entry and can be used by system software. For example, these bits may be used to hold
        information useful to a page scanning algorithm or be used to mark more abstract page attributes.
                                  NOTE: Software Considerations
                Although U2 and U3 may be available in some implementations, software
                should avoid use of these because some implementations may only support
                U0 and U1.
The following optional attributes, are programmable through MMU assist register 2 (MAS2):
   • Alternate coherency mode, programmed through MAS2[ACM], allows an implementation to
       employ multiple coherency methods and to participate in multiple coherency protocols on a per
       page basis. If the M attribute (memory coherence required) is not set (M = 0), the page has no
       associated coherency and the ACM attribute is ignored. If M is set, the ACM attribute determines
       the coherency domain (or protocol) used for the page. ACM values are implementation dependent.
   • <VLE>:
       Variable-length encoding (VLE). The VLE attribute, MAS2[VLE], identifies pages that contain
       instructions from the VLE instruction set. If VLE = 0, instructions fetched from the page are
       decoded and executed as non-VLE instructions. If VLE = 1, instructions fetched from the page are
       decoded and executed as VLE instructions. For more information, see the VLE PEM.
Consult the user documentation to determine whether these attributes are implemented.
The WIMGE attributes are programmed by the operating system for each page. The W and I attributes
control how the processor performing an access uses its own cache. The M attribute ensures that coherency
is maintained for all copies of the addressed memory location. The G attribute prevents speculative loading
from the addressed memory location. (An operation is said to be performed speculatively if, at the time
that it is performed, it is not known to be required by the sequential execution model.) The E attribute
defines the order in which the bytes that consist of a multiple-byte data object are stored in memory (big-
or little-endian).
The WIMGE attributes occupy 5 bits in the TLB entries for page address translation. The operating system
writes the WIMGE bits for each page into the TLB entries as it maps translations. For more information,
see Section 6.5.3.1, “TLB Entries.”
All combinations of these attributes are supported except:
    • Those that simultaneously specify a region as write-through-required and caching-inhibited.
       Write-through and caching-inhibited attributes are mutually exclusive because the write-through
       attribute permits the data to be in the data cache while the caching-inhibited attribute does not.
    • Those that simultaneously specify a region as little-endian and VLE mode. <VLE>
In general, aliasing pages (creating TLB mappings to the same physical page using 2 or more different
virtual addresses) for which the WIMGE attribute differ may cause coherency to be lost. Additionally,
changing WIMGE attributes on a page may require additional steps by software to ensure coherency. More
specific cases are described in the following sections that describe the individual page attributes.

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     6-11
Cache and MMU Architecture


Memory that is write-through-required or caching-inhibited is not intended for general-purpose
programming. For example, load and reserve and store conditional instructions may cause the system data
storage interrupt handler to be invoked if they specify a location in memory having either of these
attributes. Some implementations take a data storage interrupt if the location is write-through but does not
take the interrupt if the location is cache-inhibited.

6.4.2        Write-Through-Required Attribute (W)
A page marked W = 0 is generally considered to be write-back. Some implementations may implement
certain caches in the cache hierarchy such as the L1 cache, to always write-through all cacheable stores.
Such write-through characteristics may be limited to a specific portion of the cache hierarchy and the
stores may be only written through to another cache which is the point of coherency for the processor.
Processors that implement category Write Shadow Mode operate in this manner by writing any store data
through the L1 data cache to the L2 cache such that no modified data is present in the L1 data cache.
A store to a write-through-required (W = 1) memory location is performed in main memory and may cause
additional memory locations to be accessed. If a copy of the block containing the specified location is
retained in the data cache, the store is also performed in the data cache. A store to write-through-required
memory cannot cause a block to be put in a modified state in the data cache.
Also, if a store instruction that accesses a block in a location marked as write-through-required is executed
when the block is already considered to be modified in the data cache, the block may continue to be
considered to be modified in the data cache even if the store causes all modified locations in the block to
be written to main memory. In some processors, accesses caused by separate store instructions that specify
locations in write-through-required memory may be combined into one access. This is called
store-gathering. Such combining does not occur if the store instructions are separated by a memory barrier
(sync or an mbar).
Aliasing a page as both W = 0 and W = 1 is coherent when all accesses are performed by one processor. If
some store instructions executed by a given processor access locations in a block as write-through-required
and other store instructions executed by the same processor access locations in that block as write-back,
software must ensure that the block cannot be accessed by another processor or mechanism in the system.

6.4.3        Caching-Inhibited Attribute (I)
A load instruction that specifies a location in caching-inhibited (I = 1) memory is performed to main
memory and may cause additional locations in main memory to be accessed unless the specified location
is also guarded. An instruction fetch from caching-inhibited memory may cause additional words in main
memory to be accessed. No copy of the accessed locations is placed into the caches.
Aliasing caching-inhibited and cached memory operations should generally be avoided. If a load occurs
to a caching-inhibited location for which a copy of the location exists in the cache hierarchy of the
processor executing the memory access, it is implementation dependent whether the cached location is
used to satisfy the load or whether the cache copy is ignored and the load is satisfied from main memory.
If a store occurs to a caching inhibited location, the store is always performed in main memory even if a
copy of the location exists in the cache hierarchy of the processor executing the store. It is implementation
dependent whether the cache is updated with the stored value. If software must perform caching-inhibited


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-12                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


accesses to a page that has been accessed as cached, it should flush the page (or lines that are intended to
be accessed) from the cache prior to accessing them as caching-inhibited.
In some processors, nonoverlapping accesses caused by separate load instructions that specify locations in
caching-inhibited memory may be combined into one access, as may nonoverlapping accesses caused by
separate store instructions to caching-inhibited memory (that is, store-gathering). Such combining does not
occur if the load or store instructions are separated by a memory barrier instruction or if the memory is
also guarded.

6.4.4        Memory Coherence–Required Attribute (M)
Memory coherence refers to the ordering of stores to a single location. Atomic stores to a given location
are coherent if they are serialized, and no processor or mechanism can observe any subset of those stores
as occurring in a conflicting order. This serialization order is an abstract sequence: the physical storage
location need not assume each of the values written to it. For example, a processor may update a location
several times before the value is written to physical storage.
The result of a store operation is not available to every processor or mechanism at the same instant, and
some mechanisms may observe only some of the values written to a location. However, when a location
is accessed atomically and coherently by all processors and mechanisms, the sequence loaded from the
location by any processor or mechanism during any interval of time forms a subsequence of the sequence
of values that the location logically held during that interval. That is, a mechanism can never load an older
value after it loads a newer one.
Memory coherence is managed in blocks called coherence blocks, whose size is implementation
dependent but is usually the size of a cache block.
For storage that is not memory coherence required (M = 0), software must explicitly manage memory
coherence to the extent required by program correctness; operations required for this may be system
dependent.
Because the memory coherence required attribute for a given location is of little use unless all processors
that access the location do so coherently, in this document, statements about memory coherence–required
storage generally assume that the storage memory coherence is required for all processors that access it.
                                 NOTE: Software Considerations
                Operating systems that allow programs to request that storage not be
                memory coherence required should provide services to assist in managing
                memory coherence for such storage, including all system-dependent aspects
                thereof.
                In most systems, the default is that all storage requires coherence. For some
                applications in some systems, software management of coherence may yield
                better performance. In such cases, a program can request that a given unit of
                storage not be memory coherence required and can manage the coherence
                of that storage by using the sync instruction, the cache management
                instructions, and services provided by the operating system.



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     6-13
Cache and MMU Architecture


6.4.5        Guarded Attribute (G)
Storage is said to be well-behaved if the corresponding physical storage exists and is not defective, and if
the effects of a single access to it are indistinguishable from the effects of multiple identical accesses to it.
Data and instructions can be fetched out-of-order from well-behaved storage without causing undesired
side effects.
Storage is said to be guarded if the G bit is set in the TLB entry that translates the effective address. This
setting can protect certain memory areas from read accesses made by the processor that are not dictated
directly by the program. If areas of physical memory are not fully populated (in other words, there are
holes in the physical memory map within this area), this setting can protect the system from undesired
accesses caused by speculative load operations (referred to as ‘out of order’ accesses in Power ISA and
described in Section 6.4.5.1, “Definition of Speculative and Out-of-Order Memory Accesses”) that could
lead to a machine check exception. Also, the guarded bit can be used to prevent speculative load operations
from occurring to certain peripheral devices that produce side effects.
In general, storage that is not well-behaved should be guarded. Because such storage may represent a
control register on an I/O device or may include locations that do not exist, an out-of-order access to such
storage may cause an I/O device to perform unintended operations or may result in a machine check.
Locations accessed by decorated storage instructions that are in caching-inhibited memory should always
be marked as guarded.
Instruction fetching is not affected by the G bit. Software must set guarded pages to no execute (that is
UX=0 and SX=0) to prevent instruction fetching from guarded storage.
Accesses to caching inhibited memory that is both guarded and caching-inhibited, aligned, with an atomic
access will only be executed once. If the access is misaligned or not an atomic access, multiple accesses
may be performed including accessing the same byte more than once.
The following rules apply to in-order execution of load and store instructions for which the first byte of
the storage operand is in storage that is both caching inhibited and guarded.
    • Load or store instruction that causes an atomic access
If any portion of the storage operand has been accessed, the instruction completes before the interrupt
occurs if any of the following exceptions is pending.
    • Any asynchronous exceptions that would cause an asynchronous interrupt.
    • Load or store instruction that causes an alignment exception, a data TLB error exception, or that
        causes a data storage exception.
The portion of the storage operand that is in caching inhibited and guarded storage is not accessed.

6.4.5.1        Definition of Speculative and Out-of-Order Memory Accesses
In the Power ISA definition, the term ‘out of order’ replaced the term ‘speculative’ with respect to memory
accesses to avoid a conflict between the word’s meaning in the context of execution of instructions past
unresolved branches. Power ISA’s use of ‘out of order’ in this context could in turn be confused with the
notion of loads and stores being reordered in a weakly ordered memory system.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-14                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


In the context of memory accesses, this document uses the terms ‘speculative’ and ‘out of order’ as
follows:
    • Speculative memory access—An access that occurs before it is known to be required by the
        sequential execution model
    • Out-of-order memory access—An access performed ahead of one that may have preceded it in the
        sequential model, such as is allowed by a weakly ordered memory model

6.4.5.2        Performing Operations Speculatively
An operation is said to be nonspeculative if it is guaranteed to be required by the sequential execution
model. Any other operation is said to be performed speculatively, (out of order).
The processor performs operations speculatively on the expectation that the results will be needed by an
instruction required by the sequential execution model. Whether they are needed depends on whether
control flow is diverted away from the instruction by any event that changes the context in which the
instruction is executed, such as an exception, branch, trap, system call, return from interrupt instruction.
Typically, the hardware performs operations speculatively when it has resources that would otherwise be
idle, so the operation incurs little or no cost. If subsequent events such as branches or exceptions indicate
that the operation would not have been performed, the processor abandons any results of the operation
except as described below.
Most operations can be performed speculatively, as long as the machine appears to follow the sequential
execution model. Speculative operations have the following restrictions:
   • Stores—A store instruction cannot execute speculatively in a manner such that the alteration of the
       target location can be observed by other processors or mechanisms. EIS requires that stores are not
       executed speculatively.
   • Accessing guarded memory—The restrictions for this case are given in Section 6.4.5.2.1,
       “Speculative Accesses to Guarded Memory.”
Only asynchronous machine check exceptions may be reported due to an operation that is performed
speculatively, until such time as it is known that the operation is required by the sequential execution
model. Other than asynchronous machine check, the only other permitted side effect of performing an
operation speculatively is that nonguarded memory locations that could be fetched into a cache by non
speculative execution may be fetched speculatively into that cache.

6.4.5.2.1        Speculative Accesses to Guarded Memory
Load accesses from guarded memory may be performed speculatively if a copy of the target location is in
a cache; the location may be accessed from the cache or from main memory.
Note that software should ensure that only well behaved memory is loaded into a cache, either by marking
as caching-inhibited (and guarded) all memory that may not be well behaved or by marking such memory
caching-allowed (and guarded) and referring only to well behaved cache blocks.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-15
Cache and MMU Architecture


6.4.5.2.2        Instruction Accesses: Guarded Memory and No-Execute Memory
The G bit is ignored for instruction fetches, and instructions are speculatively fetched from guarded pages.
To prevent speculative fetches from pages that contain no instructions and are not well behaved, the page
should be designated as no-execute (with the UX/SX page permission bits cleared). If the effective address
of the current instruction is mapped to no-execute memory, an instruction storage exception is generated.

6.4.6        Byte-Ordering (Endianness) Attribute (E)
Objects may be loaded from or stored to memory in byte, half word, word, double word, or quad word
units. For a particular data length, load and store operations are symmetrical; a store followed by a load of
the same data object yields an unchanged value. The architecture does not guarantee the order in which
the bytes that consist of multiple-byte data objects are stored into memory. The endianness (E) page
attribute distinguishes between memory that is big or little endian, as described in the following
subsections.
Except for instruction fetches, it is always permitted to access the same location using two effective
addresses with different E bit settings. Instruction pages must be flushed from any caches before the E bit
can be changed for those addresses. See Section 4.5.3.4, “Byte Ordering,” for more information about
endianness.
Misaligned accesses which cross a page boundary for which the two pages have differing endian attributes
produces a byte ordering exception.

6.4.6.1        Big-Endian Pages and Multiple-Byte Scalars
If a stored multiple-byte object is probed by reading its component bytes one at a time using load-byte
instructions, the store order may be perceived. If such probing shows that the lowest memory address
contains the highest-order byte of the multiple-byte scalar, the next-higher sequential address the
next-least-significant byte, and so on, the multiple-byte object is stored in big-endian form. Big-endian
memory is defined on a page basis by the memory/cache attribute, E = 0.

6.4.6.2        Little-Endian Pages and Multiple-Byte Scalars
If the probing described above shows that the lowest memory address contains the lowest-order byte of
the multiple-byte scalar, the next-higher sequential address the next-most-significant byte, and so on, the
multiple-byte object is stored in little-endian form. Setting E selects little-endian byte ordering for that
page. For Power ISA embedded devices it is defined as true little-endian memory, not the version of little
endian defined by PowerPC architecture–compliant devices.

6.4.6.3        Structure Mapping Examples
The following C programming example defines the data structure S used in this section to demonstrate how
the bytes that consist of each element (a, b, c, d, e, and f) are mapped into memory. The structure contains
scalars (shown in hexadecimal in the comments) and a sequence of characters, shown in single quotation
marks.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-16                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture

   struct {
      int a; /* 0x1112_1314word                        */
      doubleb;/* 0x2122_2324_2526_2728double word      */
      char *c;/* 0x3132_3334word                       */
      chard[7];/* 'L','M','N','O','P','Q','R'array of bytes*/
      shorte; /* 0x5152   half word                    */
      int f; /* 0x6162_6364word                        */
   } S;

This figure shows the big-endian mapping of the structure.
                 Contents   11         12      13      14       (x)     (x)       (x)      (x)
                 Address    00         01      02      03       04      05        06       07

                 Contents   21         22      23      24       25      26        27       28
                 Address    08         09      0A      0B      0C       0D        0E       0F

                 Contents   31         32      33      34       ‘L’     ‘M’       ‘N’      ‘O’
                 Address    10         11      12      13       14      15        16       17

                 Contents   ‘P’        ‘Q’     ‘R’     (x)      51      52        (x)      (x)
                 Address    18         19      1A      1B      1C       1D        1E       1F

                 Contents   61         62      63      64       (x)     (x)       (x)      (x)
                 Address    20         21      22      23       24      25        26       27
                                  Figure 6-1. Big-Endian Mapping of Structure S

                                                     NOTE
                The MSB of each scalar is at the lowest address. The mapping uses padding
                (indicated by (x)) to align the scalars—4 bytes between elements a and b, 1
                byte between d and e, and 2 bytes between e and f. Note that the padding is
                determined by the compiler, not the architecture.
This figure shows the structure using little-endian mapping, showing double words laid out with addresses
increasing from right to left.
                 Contents   (x)        (x)     (x)     (x)     11       12        13       14
                 Address    07         06      05      04      03       02        01       00

                 Contents   21         22      23      24      25       26        27       28
                 Address    0F         0E      0D      0C      0B       0A        09       08

                 Contents   ‘O’        ‘N’     ‘M’     ‘L’     31       32        33       34
                 Address    17         16      15      14      13       12        11       10

                 Contents   (x)        (x)     51      52      (x)      ‘R’       ‘Q’      ‘P’
                 Address    1F         1E      1D      1C      1B       1A        19       18

                 Contents   (x)        (x)     (x)     (x)     61       62        63       64
                 Address    27         26      25      24      23       22        21       20

                      Figure 6-2. Little-Endian Mapping of Structure S—Alternate View



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-17
Cache and MMU Architecture


6.4.7        Mismatched Memory Cache Attributes
Aliased accesses to the same memory location using two effective addresses for which the write-through
required attribute (W bit) differs meet the memory coherence requirements described in Section 6.4.2,
“Write-Through-Required Attribute (W),” if the accesses are performed by a single processor. If the
accesses are performed by two or more processors, coherence is enforced by the hardware only if the
write-through required attribute is the same for all the accesses.
Loads, stores, dcbz, dcbzl <DEO>, dcbzep <E.PD>, and dcbzlep <E.PD, DEO> instructions, and
instruction fetches to the same memory location using two effective addresses for which the
caching-inhibited attribute (I bit) differs must meet the requirement that a copy of the target location of an
access to caching-inhibited memory not be in the cache. Violation of this requirement is considered a
programming error; software must ensure that the location has not previously been brought into the cache
or, if it has, that it has been flushed from the cache. If the programming error occurs, the result of the access
is boundedly undefined and it is implementation dependent whether the access bypasses the cache or is
performed in the cache. It is not considered a programming error if the target location of any other cache
management instruction to caching-inhibited memory is in the cache.
Accesses to the same memory location using two effective addresses for which the memory coherence
attribute (M bit) differs may require explicit software synchronization before accessing the location with
M = 1 if the location has previously been accessed with M = 0. Any such requirement is implementation
and system-dependent. For example, in some systems that use bus snooping, no software synchronization
may be required. In some directory-based systems, software may be required to execute dcbf instructions
on each processor to flush all cache entries accessed with M = 0 before accessing those locations with
M = 1.
Accesses to the same memory location using two effective addresses for which the guarded attribute (G
bit) differs are always permitted.
Except for instruction fetches, accesses to the same memory location using two effective addresses for
which the endian storage attribute (E bit) differs are always permitted as described in Section 6.4.6,
“Byte-Ordering (Endianness) Attribute (E).” Instruction memory locations must be flushed before the
endian attribute can be changed for those addresses.
The requirements on mismatched user-defined memory attributes (U0–U3) is implementation-dependent.

6.4.7.1        Coherency Paradoxes and WIMGE
Careless programming of the WIMGE bits may create situations that present coherency paradoxes to the
processor. These paradoxes can occur within a single processor or across several processors. It is important
to note that, in the presence of a paradox, the operating system software is responsible for correctness.
In particular, a coherency paradox can occur when the state of these bits is changed without appropriate
precautions (such as flushing the pages that correspond to the changed bits from the caches of all
processors in the system) or when the address translations of aliased real addresses specify different values
for certain WIMGE bit values. For more information, see Section 6.4.7, “Mismatched Memory Cache
Attributes.”



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-18                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


Support for M = 1 memory is optional. Cache attribute settings where both W = 1 and I = 1 are not
supported. For all supported combinations of the W, I, and M bits, both G and E may be 0 or 1.

6.4.7.2        Self-Modifying Code
When a processor modifies any memory location that can contain an instruction, software must ensure that
the instruction cache is made consistent with data memory and that the modifications are made visible to
the instruction fetching mechanism. This must be done even if the cache is disabled or if the page is marked
caching inhibited.
The following instruction sequence can be used to accomplish this when the instructions being modified
are in memory that is memory-coherence required and one processor both modifies the instructions and
executes them. (Additional synchronization is needed when one processor modifies instructions that
another will execute.)
The following sequence synchronizes the instruction stream (using either dcbst or dcbf):
   dcbst (or dcbf)          // force modified instructions to memory from data cache
   sync                     // insure dcbst completed
   icbi                     // invalidate old copies of modified instruction in icache
   sync                     // ensure icbi completed
   isync                    // remove any old copies of modified instructions that may have been
                            // fetched, but not completed (force refetch to get new
                            // modified instructions)


6.4.8        Shared Memory
The architecture supports sharing memory between programs, between different instances of the same
program, and between processors and other mechanisms. It also supports access to a memory location by
one or more programs using different effective addresses. In these cases, memory is shared in blocks that
are an integral number of pages. When one physical memory location has different effective addresses, the
addresses are said to be aliases. Each application can be granted separate access privileges to aliased pages.
Section 6.4.8.6, “Lock Acquisition and Import Barriers,” gives examples of how sync and mbar are used
to control memory access ordering when memory is shared among programs.

6.4.8.1        Memory Access Ordering
Memory access ordering is weakly consistent. This provides an opportunity for improved performance
over a model with stronger consistency rules but places the responsibility on the program to ensure that
ordering or synchronization instructions are properly placed for correct execution of the program.
Strongly-consistent ordering ensures that all programs that share a data resource observe updates to that
memory in the same order in which updates occur.
In a weakly ordered system, the order in which a processor accesses memory, the order in which those
accesses are performed with respect to other processors or mechanisms, and the order in which they are
performed in main memory may all be different. Although such a model creates opportunities for
processors to reschedule memory transactions based on the dynamics of the instruction stream and
memory traffic, it shifts the burden onto the programmer to force synchronization when memory


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-19
Cache and MMU Architecture


transactions must occur in a specified order, and the architecture provides instructions for efficient
handling of synchronization specific to the need.
In almost all applications, concern over memory transaction order is normally isolated to a few specialized
OS routines such as interprocessor communication routines, library routines for locking and unlocking
shared memory data structures, and I/O device drivers. Because such areas of increased programming
difficulty are characterized easily enough, the resulting performance improvement easily justifies the use
of a weakly ordered storage model.
While a weakly ordered memory model appears extraordinarily complicated to the programmer, in fact
several restrictions placed by EIS simplify this greatly. In practice this requires that the programmer only
really be aware of the ordering of memory accesses that are used by another processor or another device
and the other processor or device care about the order. In general, this reduces even further to the following
three scenarios:
    1. The shared memory multiprocessor (SMP) case
        — Code is running on more than one processor.
        — Data being manipulated is accessed from more than one processor.
        — Software is designed, in general, with some sort of mutual exclusion or locking mechanism
            regardless of the architecture (because software running on one processor must make several
            updates to data structures atomically).
    2. The device driver case
        — Code is running that controls a device through memory-mapped addresses.
        — Accesses to these memory-mapped registers usually need to occur in a specific order because
            the accesses have side effects (for example a store to an address causes the device to perform
            some action and the order these actions are performed must be explicitly controlled in order for
            the device to perform correctly).
        — Addresses are usually marked as caching-inhibited and guarded because the memory is not
            “well behaved.”
    3. The processor synchronization case
        — Some registers within the processor, such as the MSR, have special synchronization
            requirements associated with them to guarantee when changes which may effect memory
            accesses, occur. (see Section 4.5.4.3, “Synchronization Requirements” for the specific registers
            and their synchronization requirements).
        — Only system programmers modifying these special registers need be aware of these cases.

6.4.8.2        Architecture Ordering Requirements
EIS implicitly requires processors to order certain types of memory accesses. Other accesses require
software to execute memory barrier instructions to enforce ordering. The implicit memory access rules are
as follows:
    1. All loads and stores appear to execute in-order on the same processor. That is, each memory access
        a processor performs, if that memory location is not stored to by another processor or device, it will
        appear to be performed in order to the processor. For example, a processor executes the following
        sequence:

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-20                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture

        lwz      r3,0(r4)
        lwz      r5,100(r4)

        Because there is no way for a single processor to distinguish which order these loads occurred in
        (because the memory is “well behaved”), the loads can be performed in any order. Similarly the
        sequence:
        stw      r3,0(r4)
        stw      r5,100(r4)

        may also be performed out of order because a single processor cannot distinguish which order the
        stores are performed in. However, the sequence:
        stw      r3,0(r4)
        lwz      r5,0(r4)

       must be performed in order on the same processor because the processor can distinguish a
       difference depending on whether the store or the load is performed first.
       In general this means that the processor performs memory accesses in order between any two
       accesses to overlapping bytes. The processor may decide that accesses overlap if they touch a
       larger subset and not merely a common byte, but such ordering is not required by EIS.
       Such accesses to overlapping bytes may not occur in order external to the performing processor
       and the processor that performs these may actually satisfy the load from a store queue or other
       implementation dependent buffer.
    2. Any load or store that depends on data from a previous load or store must be performed in order.
       For example, a load retrieves the address that is used in a subsequent load:
        lwz      r3,0(r4)
        lwz      r5,0(r3)

       Because the second load’s address depends on the first load being performed and providing data,
       the processor must ensure that the first load occurs before the second is attempted (and in fact must
       be sure the first load has returned data before even attempting translation).
    3. Guarded caching-inhibited stores must be performed in order with respect to other guarded
       caching-inhibited stores and guarded caching-inhibited loads must be performed in order with
       respect to other guarded caching-inhibited loads. This generally only applies to writing device
       drivers that control memory mapped devices with side effects through store operations.
    4. A store operation cannot be performed before a previous load operation regardless of the addresses.
       That is if a load is followed by a store, then the load will always be performed before the store is.
       This is an EIS requirement of Freescale processors. It is unlikely, but possible, that other Power
       Architecture® cores may not require this.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     6-21
Cache and MMU Architecture


This table describes how the architecture defines requirements for ordering of loads and stores.
                                          Table 6-2. Load and Store Ordering

  Access Type                                                Architecture Definition

Load ordering with The architecture guarantees that loads that are both caching-inhibited (I = 1) and guarded (G = 1) are not
respect to other   reordered with respect to one another.
loads
                   If a load instruction depends on the value returned by a preceding load (because the value is used to
                   compute the EA specified by the second load), the corresponding memory accesses are performed in
                   program order with respect to any processor or mechanism to the extent required by the associated
                   memory coherence required attributes (that is, the memory coherence required attribute, if any, associated
                   with each access). This applies even if the dependency does not affect program logic (for example, the
                   value returned by the first load is ANDed with zero and then added to the EA specified by the second load).
Store ordering with If two store instructions specify memory locations that are both caching inhibited and guarded, the
respect to other    corresponding memory accesses are performed in program order with respect to any processor or
stores              mechanism. Otherwise, stores are weakly ordered with respect to one another.
Load followed by    Any store instruction will not be performed until all previous load instructions on the same processor have
store               been performed.instructions specify memory locations that are both caching inhibited and guarded, the
                    corresponding memory accesses are performed in program order with respect to any processor or
                    mechanism. EIS does not allow the implementation of speculative stores.
Store ordering with The architecture specifies that a memory barrier must be used to ensure sequential ordering of loads with
respect to loads    respect to stores.


6.4.8.3        Forcing Load and Store Ordering (Memory Barriers)
The implicit ordering requirements enforced by the processor handle the vast majority of all the
programming cases when accessing memory locations from a single core. Normal software should only
be concerned about ordering when the memory locations being accessed are done so in an SMP
environment or the memory locations are part of a device’s memory mapped locations (that is, non-well
behaved memory). If these cases occur, then software must place explicit memory barriers to control the
order of memory accesses. A memory barrier causes ordering between memory accesses that occur before
the barrier in the instruction stream and memory accesses that occur after the barrier in the instruction
stream.
There are four memory barriers that can be used to order memory accesses, depending on the type of
memory (the WIMGE attributes) being accessed and the level of performance desired. Memory barriers,
by definition, can slow down the processor because they prevent the processor from performing loads and
stores in their most efficient order. The barriers from strongest (that is, enforces the most ordering between
different types of accesses) to the weakest are:
    • sync (or sync 0 or msync)—sync creates a barrier such that all (regardless of WIMGE attributes)
        memory accesses that occur before the sync are performed before any accesses after the sync. sync
        also ensures that no other instructions after the sync are initiated until the instructions before the
        sync and the sync itself, have performed their operations. sync also has the most negative effect on
        performance. sync can be used regardless of the memory attributes of the access and can be used
        in the place of any of the other barriers. However, it should only be used when performance isn’t
        an issue, or if no other barrier orders the memory accesses. sync also orders stores and the effects
        of msgsnd instructions.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-22                                                                                                  Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


    •   mbar (or mbar 0)—mbar creates the same barrier sync does, however it does not restrict
        instructions following mbar from being initiated. It does prevent memory accesses following the
        mbar from being performed until all the memory accesses prior to the mbar have been performed.
        mbar affects performance almost as much as sync does.
    •   mbar 1—mbar 1 creates a memory barrier that is the same as the eieio instruction from the
        original PowerPC architecture. It creates two different barriers:
        — Loads and stores that are both caching-inhibited and guarded (WIMGE = 0b01x1x) as well as
            stores that are write-through required (WIMGE = 0b10xxx). This is useful for the device driver
            case which would be doing loads and stores to caching-inhibited memory.
        — Stores that have the following attributes: not caching-inhibited, not write-through required, and
            memory coherence required (WIMGE = 0b001xx). These are stores to normal cacheable
            coherent memory.
        mbar 1 is a better performing memory barrier than sync or mbar.
    •   lwsync (or sync 1)—lwsync (lightweight sync) creates a barrier for normal cacheable memory
        accesses (WIMGE = 0b001xx). It orders all combinations of the loads and stores except for a store
        followed by a load.
        lwsync is a better performing memory barrier than sync, mbar, or mbar 1.
Another method also exists for ordering all caching-inhibited loads and stores which are guarded. The
HID0[CIGLSO] bit can be set to force all caching-inhibited loads and stores which are guarded to be
performed in order. This is not a barrier, per se, but a system attribute that causes the processor to always
order these accesses and also ensures that the system interconnect does not reorder them as well. Setting
this bit is a good way to deal with the device driver case over a broad range of code if the memory accesses
to the device are caching-inhibited and guarded which is normally the case. This is likely to perform better
than inserting an mbar in specific places since load-load, store-store, and load-store are already ordered
by the architecture for guarded, caching inhibited loads and stores. For a guarded, caching-inhibited store
followed by a guarded caching-inhibited load many implementations can handle this efficiently by simply
ensuring that the processor performs the store prior to starting the load.
                                                  NOTE
                 Not all implementations support all barriers. See the core reference manual.

6.4.8.4        Architectural Memory Access Ordering
Table 6-3 displays the Power ISA and EIS memory access ordering requirements based on the WIMG
attributes and access type. For access where the attributes differ, ordering between these types of access
generally requires mbar 0 (or sync) except that write-through required and guarded caching inhibited
loads or stores may be ordered with mbar 1. For Table 6-3, entries list the barriers in order from the likely
most efficient to least efficient. Efficiency between different types of barriers may differ between
implementations. Some older implementations may not provide all forms of barriers, but all
implementations provide sync (sync 0 or msync) and mbar 0. ‘Yes’ means that the given ordering is




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-23
Cache and MMU Architecture


already guaranteed by the architecture and no barrier is required. Not all possible barriers are listed and
sync 0 or mbar 0 will enforce all barriers.
                                    Table 6-3. Architectural Memory Access Ordering

                                                            Store-Store      Load-Load         Store-Load       Load-Store
       Memory Access Attributes              WIMGE
                                                             Ordered          Ordered           Ordered          Ordered

   Caching-inhibited and Guarded             0b01x1x            Yes              Yes           HID0[CIGLSO]          Yes
                                                                                                 mbar 1
                                                                                                 mbar 0
                                                                                                  sync

 Caching-inhibited and non Guarded           0b01x0x          mbar 0           mbar 0            mbar 0              Yes
                                                               sync             sync              sync

             Write-through                   0b10xxx          mbar 1           mbar 0            mbar 0              Yes
                                                              mbar 0            sync              sync
                                                               sync

               Write-back                    0b00xxx          lwsync           lwsync            mbar 0              Yes
                                                              mbar 0           mbar 0             sync
                                                               sync             sync


6.4.8.5          Memory Barrier Example
When a processor (P1) executes sync, a memory barrier is created that separates applicable memory
accesses into two groups, G1 and G2. G1 includes all applicable memory accesses associated with
instructions preceding the barrier-creating instruction, and G2 includes all applicable memory accesses
associated with instructions following the barrier-creating instruction.
This figure shows an example using a two-processor system.

       Processor 1 (P1)     Memory Access Groups G1 and G2                             Processor 2 (P2)

         Instruction 1      G1: Memory accesses generated by P1 When memory coherence is required, G1 accesses that
                            before the memory barrier           affect P2 are also performed before the memory barrier.
         Instruction 2
         Instruction 3
         Instruction 4
       Instruction 5 (sync)—Memory barrier                        Barrier generated by P1 does not order P2 instructions or
                                                                  associated accesses with respect to other P2 instructions
                                                                  and associated accesses.
         Instruction 6      G2: Memory accesses generated by P1 When memory coherence is required, G2 accesses that
                            after the memory barrier            affect P2 are also performed after the memory barrier.
         Instruction 7
         Instruction 8
         Instruction 9
         Instruction 10

                            Figure 6-3. Memory Barrier when Coherency is Required (M = 1)

The memory barrier ensures that all memory accesses in G1 are performed with respect to any processor
or mechanism, to the extent required by the associated memory coherence required attributes (that is, the

           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-24                                                                                                 Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                    Cache and MMU Architecture


memory-coherence required attribute, if any, associated with each access), before any memory accesses in
G2 are performed with respect to that processor or mechanism.
The ordering enforced by a memory barrier is said to be cumulative if it also orders memory accesses that
are performed by processors and mechanisms other than P1, as follows:
    • G1 includes all applicable memory accesses by any such processor or mechanism that have been
        performed with respect to P1 before the memory barrier is created.
    • G2 includes all applicable memory accesses by any such processor or mechanism that are
        performed after a load instruction executed by that processor or mechanism has returned the value
        stored by a store that is in G2.
This figure shows an example of a cumulative memory barrier in a two-processor system.

     Processor 1 (P1)                        Memory Access Groups G1 and G2                                Processor 2 (P2)

      P1 Instruction 1   G1: Memory accesses generated by P1 and P2 that affect P1. Includes               P2 Instruction L
                         accesses generated by executing P2 instructions L–O (assuming that the
      P1 Instruction 2                                                                                     P2 Instruction M
                         access generated by instruction O occurs before P1’s sync is executed).
      P1 Instruction 3                                                                                     P2 Instruction N
      P1 Instruction 4                                                                                     P2 Instruction O
     P1 Instruction 5 (sync)—Cumulative memory barrier applies to all accesses except those                P2 Instruction P
     associated with fetching instructions following sync.
                                                                                                           P2 Instruction Q
                                                                                                           P2 Instruction R
      P1 Instruction 6   G2: Memory accesses generated by P1 and P2. Includes accesses generated           P2 Instruction S
                         by P2 instructions P–X (assuming that the access generated by instruction P
      P1 Instruction 7                                                                                     P2 Instruction T
                         occurs after P1’s sync is executed) performed after a load instruction executed
      P1 Instruction 8   by P2 has returned the value stored by a store that is in G2.                     P2 Instruction U
                         The sync memory barrier does not affect accesses associated with instruction
      P1 Instruction 9   fetching that occur after the sync.                                               P2 Instruction V
     P1 Instruction 10                                                                                     P2 Instruction W
     P1 Instruction 11                                                                                     P2 Instruction X

                                        Figure 6-4. Cumulative Memory Barrier

A memory barrier created by sync is cumulative and applies to all accesses except those associated with
fetching instructions following the sync.

6.4.8.5.1        Programming Considerations
Because instructions following an isync cannot execute until all instructions preceding isync have
completed, if an isync follows a conditional branch instruction that depends on the value returned by a
preceding load instruction, that load is performed before any loads caused by instructions following the
isync. This is true even if the effects of the dependency are independent of the value loaded (for example,
the value is compared to itself and the branch tests CRn[EQ]), and even if the branch target is the next
sequential instruction.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                       6-25
Cache and MMU Architecture


Except for the cases described above and earlier in this section, data and control dependencies do not order
memory accesses. Examples include the following:
   • If a load specifies the same memory location as a preceding store and the location is not caching
       inhibited, the load may be satisfied from a store queue (a buffer into which the processor places
       stored values before presenting them to the memory subsystem) and not be visible to other
       processors and mechanisms. As a result, if a subsequent store depends on the value returned by the
       load, the two stores need not be performed in program order with respect to other processors and
       mechanisms.
   • Because a store conditional instruction may complete before its store is performed, a conditional
       branch instruction that depends on the CR0 value set by a store conditional instruction does not
       order that store with respect to memory accesses caused by instructions that follow the branch.
       For example, in the following sequence, the stw is the bc instruction’s target:
           stwcx.
           bc
           stw

           To complete, the stwcx. must update the architected CR0 value, even though its store may not have
           been performed. The architecture does not require that the store generated by the stwcx. must be
           performed before the store generated by the stw.
       •   Because processors may predict branch target addresses and branch condition resolution, control
           dependencies (branches, for example) do not order memory accesses except as described above.
           For example, when a subroutine returns to its caller, the return address may be predicted, with the
           result that loads caused by instructions at or after the return address may be performed before the
           load that obtains the return address is performed.
Some processors implement nonarchitected duplicates of architected resources such as GPRs, CR fields,
and the LR, so resource dependencies (for example, specification of the same target register for two load
instructions) do not force ordering of memory accesses.
Examples of correct uses of dependencies, sync, and mbar to order memory accesses can be found in
Section D.1, “Synchronization.”
Because the memory model is weakly consistent, the sequential execution model as applied to instructions
that cause memory accesses guarantees only that those accesses appear to be performed in program order
with respect to the processor executing the instructions. For example, an instruction may complete, and
subsequent instructions may be executed, before memory accesses caused by the first instruction have
been performed. However, for a sequence of atomic accesses to the same memory location for which
memory coherence is required, the definition of coherence guarantees that the accesses are performed in
program order with respect to any processor or mechanism that accesses the location coherently, and
similarly if the location is one for which caching is inhibited.
Because caching-inhibited memory accesses are performed in main memory, memory barriers and
dependencies on load instructions order such accesses with respect to any processor or mechanism even if
the memory is not marked as requiring memory coherence.




           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-26                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


6.4.8.5.2        Programming Examples
Example 1 shows cumulative ordering of memory accesses preceding a memory barrier, Example 2 shows
cumulative ordering of memory accesses following a memory barrier. In both examples, assume that
locations X, Y, and Z initially contain the value 0. In both, cumulative ordering dictates that the value
loaded from location X by processor C is 1.
Programming Example 1:
   • Processor A stores the value 1 to location X.
   • Processor B loads from location X obtaining the value 1, executes a sync, then stores the value 2
      to location Y.
   • Processor C loads from location Y obtaining the value 2, executes a sync, then loads from location
      X.
Programming Example 2:
    •   Processor A stores the value 1 to location X, executes a sync, then stores the value 2 to location Y.
    •   Processor B loops, loading from location Y until the value 2 is obtained, then stores the value 3 to
        location Z.
    •   Processor C loads from location Z obtaining the value 3, executes a sync, then loads from location
        X.
The following subsections show examples of shared memory usage. These examples show the usage of
memory barrier instructions and load and reserve and store conditional instructions. In addition, these
examples assume that the memory used is well behaved cacheable and coherent memory
(WIMGE = 0b001xx). Some older processors may not support the memory barriers shown in this
example, however other appropriate memory barriers can be substituted.
In the examples, lwarx and stwcx. are used, however, these can be replaced as by other load and reserve
or store conditional instructions that offer different data sizes. In each case, the substitution is
straightforward although the same data size should be used for both the load and reserve and store
conditional instructions. For example ldarx <64> and stdcx. <64> can be used in place of lwarx and
stwcx..

6.4.8.6        Lock Acquisition and Import Barriers
An import barrier is an instruction or instruction sequence that prevents memory accesses caused by
instructions following the barrier from being performed before memory accesses that acquire a lock have
been performed. An import barrier can be used to ensure that a shared data structure protected by a lock is
not accessed until the lock has been acquired. A sync can always be used as an import barrier, but the
approaches shown below generally yield better performance because they order only the relevant memory
accesses.

6.4.8.6.1        Acquire Lock and Import Shared Memory
lwarx and stwcx. are used to obtain the lock, and an import barrier can be constructed by placing an
lwsync immediately following the loop containing the lwarx and stwcx.. The following example uses the
compare and swap primitive (see Section D.1.1, “Synchronization Primitives”) to acquire the lock.

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-27
Cache and MMU Architecture


This example assumes that all memory is well behaved cacheable memory (WIMGE = 0b001xx), the
address of the lock is in GPR 3, the value indicating that the lock is free is in GPR 4, the value to which
the lock should be set is in GPR 5, the old value of the lock is returned in GPR 6, and the address of the
shared data structure is in GPR 9.
    loop:
       lwarx      r6,0,r3     # load lock and reserve
       cmpw       r4,r6       # skip ahead if
       bne        wait        # lock not free
       stwcx.     r5,0,r3     # try to set lock
       bne        loop        # loop if lost reservation
       lwsync                 # import barrier
       lwz        r7,data1(r9)# load shared data
    .
    .
    wait: ...                   #wait for lock to free
       lwzx       r6,0,r3       # load lock
       cmpw       r4,r6         # keep waiting if
       bne        wait          # lock not free

        b         loop          # try lock again

This example continues to load and reserve the lock word and performs a stwcx. to set the lock. If the lock
is successful, then the load of the lock word must be barriered from the load of data1 protected by the lock.
The lwsync performs a ‘load with load’ barrier which insures that load of data1 occurs after the load of
the lock (which was free). An alternate way to perform the barrier is to use isync although that may
perform slower in some implementations. Using isync for the barrier, the second bne does not complete
until CR0 has been set by the stwcx.. The stwcx. does not set CR0 until it has completed (successfully or
unsuccessfully). The lock is acquired when the stwcx. completes successfully. Together, the second bne
and the subsequent isync create an import barrier that prevents the load from data1 from being performed
until the branch is resolved to be not taken.

6.4.8.6.2       Acquire Lock and Import Shared Memory Using sync and mbar
A sync instruction can always be used as an import barrier, independent of the memory control attributes
(for example, presence or absence of the caching inhibited attribute) of the memory containing the lock
and the shared data structure. When either the lock or the shared data structure is in memory that is caching
inhibited or write through required a sync or mbar 0 instruction is generally required as an import barrier.
In general, an mbar 0 will perform better than sync on most implementations.
This example assumes that all memory is not well behaved memory, the address of the lock is in GPR 3,
the value indicating that the lock is free is in GPR 4, the value to which the lock should be set is in GPR
5, the old value of the lock is returned in GPR 6, and the address of the shared data structure is in GPR 9.
    loop:
       lwarx      r6,0,r3     # load lock and reserve
       cmpw       r4,r6       # skip ahead if
       bne        wait        # lock not free
       stwcx.     r5,0,r3     # try to set lock
       bne        loop        # loop if lost reservation
       sync       (or mbar 0) # import barrier
       lwz        r7,data1(r9)# load shared data
    .
    .
    wait: ...                   #wait for lock to free



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-28                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture

        lwzx     r6,0,r3        # load lock
        cmpw     r4,r6          # keep waiting if
        bne      wait           # lock not free

        b        loop           # try lock again

This example continues to load and reserve the lock word and performs a stwcx. to set the lock. If the lock
is successful, then the load of the lock word must be barriered from the load of data1 protected by the lock.
The sync (or mbar 0) performs a barrier which insures that load of data1 occurs after the load of the lock
(which was free). An alternate way to perform the barrier is to use isync which may perform faster in some
implementations. Using isync for the barrier, the second bne does not complete until CR0 has been set by
the stwcx.. The stwcx. does not set CR0 until it has completed (successfully or unsuccessfully). The lock
is acquired when the stwcx. completes successfully. Together, the second bne and the subsequent isync
create an import barrier that prevents the load from data1 from being performed until the branch is resolved
to be not taken.
Most processors do not allow load and reserve or store conditional instructions to target memory which is
caching inhibited or write through required. For this reason, the lock word will normally be in memory
that is well behaved memory, although the shared data will be in memory that is either write through
required or caching inhibited.

6.4.8.6.3       Obtain Pointer and Import Shared Memory
If lwarx and stwcx. are used to obtain a pointer into a shared data structure, an import barrier is not needed
if all the accesses to the shared data structure depend on the value obtained for the pointer. The following
example uses the fetch and add primitive (see Section D.1.1, “Synchronization Primitives”) to obtain and
increment the pointer.
In this example, it is assumed that the address of the pointer is in GPR 3, the value to be added to the pointer
is in GPR 4, and the old value of the pointer is returned in GPR 5.
loop:       lwarx    r5,0,r3              # load pointer and reserve
            add      r0,r4,r5             # increment the pointer
            stwcx.   r0,0,r3              # try to store new value
            bne      loop                 # loop if lost reservation
            lwz      r7,data1(r5)         # load shared data

The load from data1 cannot be performed until the lwarx loads the pointer value into GPR 5. The load
from data1 may be performed out of order before the stwcx.. But if the stwcx. fails, the branch is taken
and the value returned by the load from data1 is discarded. If the stwcx. succeeds, the value returned by
the load from data1 is valid even if the load is performed out of order, because the load uses the pointer
value returned by the instance of the lwarx that created the reservation used by the successful stwcx..
An isync could be placed between the bne and the subsequent lwz, but no isync is needed if all accesses
to the shared data structure depend on the value returned by the lwarx.

6.4.8.7        Lock Release and Export Barriers
An export barrier is an instruction or sequence of instructions that prevents the store that releases a lock
from being performed before stores caused by instructions preceding the barrier have been performed. An
export barrier can be used to ensure that all stores to a shared data structure protected by a lock be


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     6-29
Cache and MMU Architecture


performed with respect to any other processor (to the extent required by the associated memory coherence
required attributes) before the store that releases the lock is performed with respect to that processor. A
sync can always be used as an export barrier, but the approaches shown below generally yield better
performance because they order only the relevant memory accesses.

6.4.8.7.1       Export Shared Memory and Release Lock
The export barrier can be constructed by placing an lwsync between the store of the shared data and the
store which frees the lock which protects the shared data..
This example assumes that all memory is well behaved cacheable memory (WIMGE = 0b001xx), the
address of the lock is in GPR 3, the value indicating that the lock is free is in GPR 4, and the address of
the shared data structure is in GPR 9.
       stw        r7,data1(r9)        # store shared data (last)
       lwsync                         # export barrier
       stw        r4,lock(r3)         # release lock

The lwsync ensures that the store that releases the lock is not performed with respect to any other
processor until all stores caused by instructions preceding the lwsync have been performed with respect
to that processor.

6.4.8.7.2       Export Shared Memory and Release Lock Using sync or mbar
A sync instruction can always be used as an export barrier, independent of the memory control attributes
(for example, presence or absence of the caching inhibited attribute) of the memory containing the lock
and the shared data structure. When either the lock or the shared data structure is in memory that is caching
inhibited or write through required a sync or mbar 0 instruction is generally required as an export barrier.
In general, an mbar 0 will perform better than sync on most implementations.
In this example it is assumed that the lock is in memory that is caching inhibited, the shared data structure
is in memory that is not caching inhibited, the address of the lock is in GPR 3, the value indicating that the
lock is free is in GPR 4, and the address of the shared data structure is in GPR 9.
       stw      r7,data1(r9)          # store shared data (last)
       sync (or mbar 0)               # export barrier
       stw      r4,lock(r3)           # release lock

The sync or mbar 0 ensures that the store that releases the lock is not performed with respect to any other
processor until all stores caused by instructions preceding the sync or mbar 0 have been performed with
respect to that processor.
If both the lock word and the shared data structure are in memory that is in write through required, mbar 1
may be used as an export barrier.

6.5       MMU Architecture
This section describes the memory management structure defined by the architecture. EIS supports
demand-paged virtual memory. Address translation misses and protection faults cause precise exceptions.
Sufficient information is available to correct the fault and restart the faulting instruction.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-30                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


The architecture defines four different types of addresses:
Effective address (EA) An EA is an address that is specified by software, either as the address of an
                        instruction (for example, the address saved in the link register when a branch and
                        link instruction is executed), or the data address computed by a storage or cache
                        management instruction (for example, the value of the contents of rA added to the
                        contents of rB for a load byte indexed instruction). EAs are addresses for which a
                        program normally uses to reference storage. In 32-bit mode, EAs only use the
                        lower 32 bits of the calculated address on 64-bit implementations.
Virtual address (VA) A VA is an address that is formed from using the EA and supplying state from the
                        current address space context. The address space context is managed by the
                        operating system and hypervisor <E.HV>. In particular the following state is part
                        of the VA:
           – EA
           – MSR[IS] or MSR[DS] depending on whether the EA was an instruction fetch (MSR[IS]) or
              a data reference (MSR[DS])
           – PIDn
           – LPIDR <E.HV>
           – MSR[GS] <E.HV>
                        If category E.PD is implemented, then external PID instructions substitute values
                        from fields in EPLC or EPSC registers for all of the address space context on a
                        data access. See Section 6.5.4, “Address Translation.” A VA is translated to a real
                        address through a translation specified by a TLB entry.
<E.HV>:
Logical address (LA) An LA is an address which a guest operating system uses as a real address. The
                        hypervisor translates a logical address to a real address when the guest writes a
                        TLB entry. The guest written TLB entry represents what a guest operating system
                        defines as a translation. The LA also includes the LPID value.
Real address (RA)       An RA is a real or physical address. The RA is what the processor sends in
                        transactions with the rest of the system. The system may provide other methods of
                        translating RAs, but such translations occur outside the domain of the processor
                        and are system specific.
Each program on a 64-bit or 32-bit implementation can access 264 or 232 bytes of effective address (EA)
space, subject to limitations imposed by the operating system. Some devices also support physical
addresses larger than 32 bits but not as large as 64 bits. Typically, each program’s EA space is a subset of
a larger virtual address (VA) space managed by the operating system.
Each effective address is translated to a real address before being used to access physical memory or an
I/O device. Hardware does this by using the address translation mechanism described in Section 6.5.4,
“Address Translation.” The operating system (and hypervisor <E.HV>) manages the physically addressed
resources of the system by setting up the tables used by the address translation mechanism.
The architecture divides the effective address space into pages. The page represents the granularity of
effective address translation, permission control, and memory/cache attributes. Differing page sizes may

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     6-31
Cache and MMU Architecture


be simultaneously supported. For an effective-to-real address translation to exist, a valid entry for the page
containing the effective address must be in a translation lookaside buffer (TLB). Addresses for which no
TLB entry exists cause exceptions.
The instruction addresses generated by a program and the addresses used by load, store, and cache
management instructions are effective addresses. However, in general, the physical memory space may not
be large enough to map all the virtual pages used by the currently active applications. With support
provided by hardware, the operating system can attempt to use the available real pages to map enough
virtual pages for an application. If a sufficient set is maintained, paging activity is minimized, therefore
maximizing performance.
The operating system can restrict access to virtual pages by selectively granting permissions for user-state
read, write, and execute, and supervisor-state read, write, and execute on a per-page basis. These
permissions can be set up for a particular system (for example, program code might be execute-only, data
structures may be mapped as read/write/no-execute) and can also be changed by the operating system
based on application requests and operating system policies.

6.5.1           MMU Programming Model
This figure shows the registers that support the MMU.
  \



                                                                MMU Registers
           Address Space Context                      MMU Control and Status (Read/Write)    MMU Configuration Info (Read Only)

             Machine State Register                      MMU Control and Status Register 0          MMU Configuration Register
                 MSR           [IS,DS,GS<E.HV]                MMUCSR0                                  MMUCFG

              Process ID Register(s)                           MMU Assist Registers                 TLB Configuration Registers
                  PID                                            MAS0                                  TLB0CFG

                 PID1                                            MAS1                                  TLB1CFG

                 PID2                                            MAS2                                  TLB2CFG

        Logical Partition ID Register <E.HV>                     MAS3                                  TLB3CFG
                LPIDR
                                                                 MAS4
       External Process ID Registers <E.PD>                                                           Interrupt Registers
                                                                 MAS5              <E.HV>
                 EPLC        Ext. PID Load Context
                                                                                              (Guest) Interrupt Vector Offset Registers
                                                                 MAS6
                EPSC         Ext. PID Store Context                                                    (G)IVOR2           Data Storage
                                                                 MAS7
                                                                                                       (G)IVOR3        Instruction Storage
                                                                 MAS8              <E.HV>
                                                                                                      (G)IVOR13          Data TLB Error

                                                                                                      (G)IVOR14       Instruction TLB Error

                                                                                             (Guest) Data Exception Address Registers
                                                                                                       (G)DEAR

                                                                                               (Guest) Exception Syndrome Registers
                                                                                                        (G)ESR

                                                       Figure 6-5. MMU Registers

These registers function as follows:

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-32                                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


    •   Machine state register (MSR). The MSR contains instruction and data space bits (MSR[DS,IS]),
        which are used to defined the address space and are part of the virtual address in address
        translation. The guest state bit (MSR[GS]), is used to indicate the processor is in guest state and is
        also part of the virtual address. <E.HV>
    •   Process ID registers (PIDs). The PIDs each contain a multi-bit value which further identifies the
        address space. The PIDs are part of the virtual address. Values in PID registers are used by the
        operating system to assign virtual address spaces. Note that individual processors may not
        implement all 14 bits of the PID registers. Early versions of the architecture allowed for more than
        one PID register to be implemented. Newer processors only implement one PID register. The
        number of PIDs implemented is indicated by the value of MMUCFG[NPIDS].
    •   Logical partition ID register (LPIDR). <E.HV>
        The LPIDR contains a logical partition ID value. The LPIDR identifies the partition which is in
        execution. The LPIDR is used by the hypervisor to manage the address spaces between logical
        partitions in a manner similar to how an operating system uses PID registers to manage address
        spaces between processes. The LIPDR is part of the virtual address.
    •   External PID registers (EPLC, EPSC). <E.PD>
        External PID registers are used by the operating system and hypervisor to substitute different
        values for the virtual address space when performing external PID instructions. This allows the
        operating system or hypervisor to perform storage operations to a different virtual address space
        from the address space in which instructions are executing.
    •   MMU control and status register 0 (MMUCSR0). MMUCSR0 is used for general control of the
        MMU. It provides the following fields:
        — TLBn array page size (TLBn_PS). Specifies the page size for TLBn array if the array supports
            multiple fixed page sizes.
        — TLB invalidate all bit for the TLBn array (TLBn_FI). Allows the specified TLB array to have
            all its entries not protected with the IPROT entry invalidated
    •   MMU assist registers (MASn). The MMU uses MAS registers configure and manage TLBs. MAS
        register functionality is summarized in Section 3.12.6, “MMU Assist Registers (MASn).”
        Section 6.5.8, “MMU Exception Handling,” Section 6.5.8.3, “MAS Register Updates for
        Exceptions, tlbsx, and tlbre,” and Section 6.5.3.4, “TLB Management using the MAS Registers,”
        provide extensive information about how the MAS registers are used.
    •   MMU configuration register (MMUCFG). Gives configuration information about the
        implementation’s MMU, including the following:
        — Number of bits in the LPID register supported by the implementation <E.HV>
        — Number of bits in a physical address supported by the implementation
        — Number of PID registers
        — Number of bits in a PID register supported by the implementation
        — Number of TLB arrays
        — MMU architecture version number
    •   TLB configuration registers (TLBnCFG), provide information about each specific TLB that is
        visible to the programming model. For example, TLB0CFG corresponds to TLB0.
        — Number of ways of associativity of TLBn

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     6-33
Cache and MMU Architecture


           — Number of entries in TLBn
           — Invalidate protect capability of TLBn
           — Other TLBn characteristics:
               – Minimum page size of TLBn
               – Maximum page size of TLBn
               – Page size availability of TLBn
       •   (Guest) Interrupt vector offset registers. (G)IVOR2 provides the vector offset for data storage
           interrupts.(G)IVOR3 provides the vector offset for instruction storage interrupts.(G)IVOR13
           provides the vector offset for data TLB error interrupts. (G)IVOR14 provides the vector offset for
           instruction TLB error interrupts.
       •   IVOR42 provides the vector for the LRAT error interrupt. <E.HV.LRAT>
       •   (Guest) Data exception address registers ((G)DEAR). (G)DEAR provides the effective address that
           was use din a data access when a data storage interrupt or data TLB error interrupt occurs.
       •   (Guest) Exception syndrome registers ((G)ESR). (G)ESR provides information about errors which
           occur from a variety interrupts. For MMU related errors, it contains bits which identify whether the
           operation was a load or a store.

6.5.2          Virtual Address (VA)
As shown in Figure 6-6, the virtual address space is composed of the following:
   • the effective address (EA), 32 bits in 32-bit mode and 64 bits in 64-bit mode
   • the address space (AS), 1 bit taken from the MSR[IS], MSR[DS], EPLC[EAS] <E.PD>, or
      EPSC[EAS] <E.PD> bit depending on the type of access (instruction, non-external PID data,
      external PID load, or external PID store)
   • the PID value, up to 14 bits from the PID, PID1, PID2, EPLC[EPID] <E.PD>, or EPSC[EPID]
      <E.PD> register depending on the type of access (instruction or non-external PID data, external
      PID load, or external PID store)
   • the logical partition ID value (LPID value), up to 12 bits from the LPIDR, EPLC[ELPID] <E.PD>,
      or EPSC[ELPID] <E.PD> register depending on the type of access (instruction or non-external
      PID data, external PID load, or external PID store) <E.HV>
   • the guest state value (GS), 1 bit taken from the MSR[GS], EPLC[EGS] <E.PD>, or EPSC[EGS]
      <E.PD> bit depending on the type of access (instruction or non-external PID data, external PID
      load, or external PID store) <E.HV>
The AS value, PID value, LPID value, and GS value determine the address space. These values are
managed by system software. When instructions are fetched or instructions execute and access storage,
they produce EAs that are combined with the address space and produce a virtual address. System software
uses the address space components to provide isolated and protected ranges of addresses that a program
may access. The total number of address spaces is 21+1+PID bits+LPID bits for implementations that support
category Embedded.Hypervisor and 21+PID bits for implementations that do not support category
Embedded.Hypervisor.



           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-34                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                 Cache and MMU Architecture


The following subsections describe how each of these values is selected as part of the virtual address based
on the type of access.
                          Effective Address                      Virtual Address (up to 92 bits)
                             (Program reference)                 (used to perform translation)

                             32 or 64 bits                     1 + 12 + 1 + 14 + 32 or 64 bits
                             EA                                GS LPID AS PID        EA


                                             Figure 6-6. Virtual Address Space


6.5.2.1        Address Space (AS) Value
The architecture defines two different virtual address spaces based on the setting of the MSR[IS] or
MSR[DS] bit. These can be called address space 0 and address space 1. The 2 different virtual address
spaces can be used to have completely separated address spaces for non-privileged and privileged
software. This is possible because when an interrupt occurs, the MSR[IS] and MSR[DS] bits are always
set to 0. Since an interrupt is required to transition from non-privileged to privileged modes, this provides
an automatic and simple means of separating the address spaces. Thus, in general address space 0 can be
used for privileged software and address space 1 can be used for non-privileged software. However, the
usage model is not enforced by the processor (except that it always sets MSR[IS] and MSR[DS] to 0 on
an interrupt), and software can be designed such that both privileged and non-privileged software share
address space 0 and memory pages are appropriately protected. The sharing of address space between
privileged can limit the amount of effective address space that a process can reference since it must share
some of its address space with the privileged software. This can be particularly limiting for 32-bit
implementations since EAs are limited to 32 bits.
The address space (AS) bit of the virtual address is formed based on the following criteria:
   • If the access is an instruction fetch generated by sequential instruction fetches or due to a change
       in program flow (from a branch or an interrupt), the AS bit in the virtual address is taken from the
       MSR[IS] bit.
   • If the access is not due to an instruction fetch (that is, is a data or cache management access), and
       the instruction which is attempting to perform the access is not an external PID instruction, the AS
       bit in the virtual address is taken from MSR[DS].
   • If the access is not due to an instruction fetch (that is, it is a data or cache management access), and
       the instruction which is attempting to perform the access is an external PID instruction, the AS bit
       in the virtual address is taken from EPLC[EAS] if the instruction is considered a load or
       EPSC[EAS] if the instruction is considered a store. <E.PD>
The AS value of a virtual address is compared to the TS field in TLB entries to determine a matching
translation.
Changing a source of the AS bit (MSR[IS], MSR[DS], EPLC[EAS], or EPSC[EAS]) is considered a
context-altering operation and requires a context synchronizing operation to ensure that the results of the
changes are visible in the current context.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                               6-35
Cache and MMU Architecture


                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                 When changing any of the register fields associated with forming virtual
                 addresses from effective addresses, software must perform a context
                 synchronizing operation to ensure that the results are visible to the
                 programming model. Since the change can occur at an time after the register
                 field is changed up until the context synchronizing operation is performed,
                 it is unwise to change state that is associated with the current execution
                 stream (particularly state which affects the virtual address of instruction
                 fetches) by using mtmsr. This applies to MSR[IS], MSR[GS], and
                 MSR[CM] (although MSR[CM] is not part of the virtual address is does
                 control whether 32 or 64 bits are used from the effective address).
                 If such a change is made with mtmsr, software must ensure that all
                 permutations of these bits have valid translations which contain the same
                 permissions and translate to the same physical address. This avoids an
                 implicit branch which is not supported by the architecture. For this reason,
                 mtmsr should not be used to change these bits, but a return from interrupt
                 instruction should be used instead since it changes the virtual address state
                 and is context synchronizing.
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                 If software uses disjoint address spaces for privileged and non-privileged
                 software, external PID instructions can be used by privileged software to
                 perform storage accesses to the non-privileged address space.

6.5.2.2        Process ID (PID) Value
A unique PID value is assigned by the operating system when executing a particular task or process. This
identifies a particular address space for which EAs produced by the task or process will be part of. When
an instruction fetch occurs, the PID value is taken from the PID register (see Section 3.12.2, “Process ID
Register (PID)”) and is used to form the VA. When a data storage access occurs, the PID value is also taken
from the PID register unless the instruction is an external PID instruction. If the data storage access is an
external PID operation, the PID value is taken from EPLC[EPID] for loads or EPSC[EPID] for stores (see
Section 3.12.7.1, “External PID Load Context Register (EPLC) <E.PD>” and Section 3.12.7.2, “External
PID Store Context (EPSC) Register <E.PD>”).
The PID value 0, is a special value. When a 0 PID value is present in the TID field of a TLB entry, that
TLB entry will match all PID values of a virtual address. In general, software will not store a 0 PID value
in the PID register or EPLC[EPID] <E.PD>, EPSC[EPID] <E.PD> fields. TLB entries with 0 PID values
in the TID field are generally used to map pages that are considered to be global among many address
spaces. The operating system will most likely do this to avoid having to provide replicated TLB entries
that map its address space when AS = 0 for every PID value.
The PID value of a virtual address is compared to the TID field in TLB entries to determine a matching
translation.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-36                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


Changing PID values in the PID register or in the EPLC[EPID] <E.PD>, EPSC[EPID] <E.PD> fields is a
context-altering operation and requires a context synchronizing operation to ensure that the results of the
changes are visible in the current context.
Some implementations provide more than one PID register. For those implementations, each PID register
forms an additional virtual address. The multiple virtual addresses are discussed in Section 6.5.4, “Address
Translation.”
                                      NOTE: Software Considerations
                 In general, the operating system need not flush the TLB between context
                 switches since each unique context will have a unique PID value associated
                 with it and the TLB entries for the different contexts can co-exist in the
                 TLB. When the operating system must associate a PID value to a new
                 context, the operating system must ensure that all the existing mappings of
                 this particular PID value are flushed from the TLBs. For example, assume
                 the operating system had assigned a PID value of 50 to a process. That
                 process terminates and another process is created. When that process is
                 created, the operating system may want to associate the PID value of 50 with
                 that process since that PID value is no longer associated with any context.
                 When the PID value is associated with that context (and will be used in TLB
                 entries for that process), the TLB must be flushed of all the old entries which
                 used the PID value 50.
                 If the number of PID values available (2PID bits-1) is larger than the number
                 of simultaneous active contexts, flushing will only occur when a new
                 process is created. However, if there are more active contexts than there are
                 PID values, the operating system will need to reassign PID values more
                 frequently, which will require the TLB to be flushed more frequently,
                 possibly affecting performance.

6.5.2.3        GS Value <E.HV>
The GS value is used to provide separate address spaces for hypervisor and guest software.
The GS bit of the virtual address is formed based on the following criteria:
   • If the access is an instruction fetch generated by sequential instruction fetches or due to a change
      in program flow (from a branch or an interrupt) the GS bit in the virtual address is taken from the
      MSR[GS] bit.
   • If the access is not due to an instruction fetch (that is, it is a data or cache management access), and
      the instruction which is attempting to perform the access is not an external PID instruction, the GS
      bit in the virtual address is taken from MSR[GS].
   • If the access is not due to an instruction fetch (that is, it is a data or cache management access), and
      the instruction which is attempting to perform the access is an external PID instruction, the GS bit
      in the virtual address is taken from EPLC[EGS] if the instruction is considered a load or
      EPSC[EGS] if the instruction is considered a store. <E.PD>



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-37
Cache and MMU Architecture


The GS value of a virtual address is compared to the TGS field in TLB entries to determine a matching
translation.
Changing a source of the GS bit (MSR[GS], EPLC[EGS] <E.PD>, or EPSC[EGS] <E.PD>) is considered
a context-altering operation and requires a context synchronizing operation to ensure that the results of the
changes are visible in the current context.

6.5.2.4        LPID Value <E.HV>
A unique LPID value is assigned by the hypervisor when executing a particular logical partition. This
identifies a unique address space for EAs, PID values, AS values, and GS = 0 values produced by the
logical partition. The hypervisor uses LPID values in a manner similar to how an operating system uses
PID values. In this case the assignment is for a particular logical partition as opposed to a process. When
an instruction fetch occurs, the LPID value is taken from the LPIDR register (see Section 3.12.1, “Logical
Partition ID Register (LPIDR) <E.HV>”) and is used to form the VA. When a data storage access occurs,
the LPID value is also taken from the LPIDR register unless the instruction is an external PID instruction.
If the data storage access is an external PID operation, the LPID value is taken from EPLC[ELPID] for
loads or EPSC[ELPID] for stores (see Section 3.12.7.1, “External PID Load Context Register (EPLC)
<E.PD>” and Section 3.12.7.2, “External PID Store Context (EPSC) Register <E.PD>”).
The LPID value 0, is a special value. When a 0 LPID value is present in the TLPID field of a TLB entry,
that TLB entry will match all LPID values of a virtual address. In general, software will not store a 0 LPID
value in the LPIDR register or EPLC[ELPID] <E.PD>, EPSC[ELPID] <E.PD> fields. TLB entries with 0
LPID values in the TID field are generally used to map pages that are considered to be global among all
logical partitions. The hypervisor will most likely do this to avoid having to provide replicated TLB entries
that map its address space when AS = 0 for every LPID value.
The LPID value of a virtual address is compared to the TLPID field in TLB entries to determine a matching
translation.
Changing LPID values in the LPIDR register or in the EPLC[ELPID] <E.PD>, EPSC[ELPID] <E.PD>
fields is a context-altering operation and requires a context synchronizing operation to ensure that the
results of the changes are visible in the current context.

6.5.3        TLB Concept
A TLB is defined as the hardware resource that contains address translations, implements protections, and
maintains the memory and cache attributes for pages. TLBs are defined by the architecture to be unified
between instruction and data accesses. That is, a separate set of TLB structures between instruction fetch
and data access are not permitted. TLB organization (for example number of TLB array structures,
associativity, and number of entries) is implementation dependent, but is reflected in the MMUCFG,
TLBnCFG registers.
The architecture defines the following general attributes associated with a TLB entry:
   • Guest space (TGS) <E.HV>
   • Logical Process ID (TLPID) <E.HV>
   • Address space (TS)


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-38                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


    •    Process ID (TID)
    •    Effective page number (EPN)
    •    Real page number (RPN)
    •    Permission bits (UR,UW,UX,SR,SW,SX)
    •    Page attributes (WIMGE, VLE <VLE>, ACM, VF <E.HV>, IPROT, V)
    •    Page size (TSIZE)
    •    User bits (U0,U1,U2,U3)
Some implementations may provide additional page attributes, but such attributes are implementation
dependent.
TLBs are software managed for MMU V1. Managing TLBs in software allows many different operating
systems to be ported quickly because memory management data structures may be in any form, and
requiring specific porting only at points where hardware intervention is required (such as a TLB entry
replacement operation).
TLB read, write, search, and invalidate instructions are defined as follows:
  • TLB Write Entry—tlbwe
  • TLB Read Entry—tlbre
  • TLB Search—tlbsx rA,rB
  • TLB Invalidate—tlbivax rA,rB
  • TLB Invalidate Local—tlbilx T,rA,rB
In addition, the architecture defines the TLB Synchronize instruction (tlbsync), which provides ordering
for the effects of all tlbivax instructions.
The TLB entry fields defined by the architecture are described in this table.
                                                     Table 6-4. TLB Fields

 Field                                                          Description

   V     Valid
         0 This TLB entry is not valid for translation.
         1 This TLB entry is valid for translation.

  TID    Translation ID. Identifies the process ID (PID) value for this TLB entry. Translation IDs are compared with PID values
         during translation to help select a TLB entry. If a TLB entry’s TID field is zero, it globally matches all PID values.

 TLPID Translation logical partition ID value. Identifies the logical partition ID (LPID) value for this TLB entry. Translation LPID
<E.HV> values are compared with LPID values during translation to help select a TLB entry. If a TLB entry’s TLPID field is zero,
       it globally matches all LPID values.

  TS     Translation space. Identifies which address space (AS) value is valid for this TLB entry. TS is compared with the AS
         value (from MSR[IS] for instruction accesses and MSR[DS] for non-external PID data accesses) for selecting a TLB
         entry during translation.

 TGS Translation guest state value. Identifies which guest state (GS) value is valid for this TLB entry. TGS is compared with
<E.HV> the GS value (from MSR[GS] for instruction accesses and MSR[GS] for non-external PID data accesses) for selecting
       a TLB entry during translation.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                        6-39
Cache and MMU Architecture


                                              Table 6-4. TLB Fields (continued)

 Field                                                            Description

TSIZE     Page size. Describes the size of the page. Not all implementations support varying page sizes. Some TLB arrays
          support a range of page sizes, while other TLB arrays only support a fixed size.

 EPN      Effective page number. Describes the effective address of the start of the page. The number of bits that are valid (used
          in translation) depends on the size of the page. EPN is compared with the effective address being translated selecting
          a TLB entry.

WIMGE Memory and cache access attributes. Describes the characteristics of memory accesses to the page and the
      subsequent treatment of that data with respect to the memory subsystem (caches and bus transactions). See
      Section 6.4.1, “Memory/Cache Access Attributes (WIMGE Bits).”
      W Write-through required (1 = write-through required)
      I Caching inhibited (1 = page is caching-inhibited)
      M Memory coherence required (1 = page is memory-coherence required)
      G Guarded (1 = page is guarded)
      E Endianness (0 = page is big endian, 1 = page is little endian)
      Note: Little-endian is true little endian, which differs slightly from the little endian capability defined by the original
      PowerPC architecture.

IPROT Invalidate protect. If set, this entry is protected against invalidation due to tlbivax, tlbilx <E.HV>, or an invalidate all
      operation from writing MMUCSR0. Not all TLB arrays support this attribute.

 VLE VLE mode. Identifies pages which contain instructions from the VLE instruction set.
<VLE>

  VF   Virtualization fault. Identifies a page which will always take a data storage interrupt directed to the hypervisor,
<E.HV> regardless of the setting of any other page attributes. Set by the hypervisor for pages associated with a device for which
       the hypervisor is providing a “virtual” device through emulation.

 ACM      Alternate coherency mode. The ACM attribute allows an implementation to employ more than a single coherency
          method. If the M attribute is not also set for this TLB entry, then the ACM attribute is ignored. This field is implementation
          specific.

 RPN      Real page number. Describes the physical starting address of the page. The real page number replaces the effective
          page address resulting in a translated address. The number of bits used in translation depend on the size of the page
          (that is, the same number of bits as the EPN for a given page translation).

  UX      User execute permission
          0 Instructions may not be executed out of this page if MSR[PR] = 1 (user mode). When a user program attempts to
            execute instructions out of this page, an instruction storage interrupt occurs.
          1 Instructions may be executed out of this page if MSR[PR] = 1 (user mode).

  SX      Supervisor execute permission
          0 Instructions may not be executed out of this page if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode). When a supervisor program
            attempts to execute instructions out of this page, an instruction storage interrupt occurs.
          1 Instructions may be executed out of this page when the processor if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode).

  UW      User write permission
          0 Stores may not be performed to this page if MSR[PR] = 1 (user mode). If a user program attempts to store
            instructions to this page, a data storage interrupt occurs.
          1 Stores may be performed to this page if MSR[PR] = 1 (user mode).




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-40                                                                                                         Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                               Cache and MMU Architecture


                                          Table 6-4. TLB Fields (continued)

 Field                                                     Description

  SW     Supervisor write permission
         0 Stores may not be performed to this page when the processor if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode). If a supervisor
           program attempts to store to this page, a data storage interrupt occurs.
         1 Stores may be performed to this page if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode).

  UR     User read permission
         0 Loads may not be performed from this page if MSR[PR] = 1 (user mode). If a user program attempts to load from
           this page, a data storage interrupt occurs.
         1 Loads may be performed from this page if MSR[PR] = 1 (user mode).

  SR     Supervisor read permission
         0 Loads may not be performed from this page if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode). If a supervisor program attempts to
           load from this page, a data storage occurs.
         1 Loads may be performed from this page if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode).

U0–U3 User page attribute bits . In general, These are extra memory bits associated with a TLB entry to be used by system
      software.

The Power ISA includes MMU features defined for Freescale embedded processors. This establishes a
MMU model that is consistent across all Freescale Power ISA devices, and because the programming
model is less likely to change, it reduces the software efforts required in porting to a new processor. Thus,
the standard defines configuration information for features such as TLBs, caches, and other entities that
have standard forms, but differing attributes (like cache sizes and associativity) such that a single software
implementation can be created that works efficiently for all implementations of a class.
The architecture defines the following functions and structures visible to the execution model of the
processor:
   • The TLB, from a programming point of view, consists of zero or more TLB arrays, each of which
       may have differing characteristics.
   • The effective-to-physical address translation mechanism
   • Methods and effects of changing and manipulating TLB arrays
   • Configuration information available to the operating system that describes the structure and form
       of the TLB arrays and translation mechanism
To assist or accelerate translation, implementations may employ other TLB structures not visible to the
programming model. Methods for using such structures are not defined explicitly, but they may be
considered at the operating-system level because they may affect an implementation’s performance.

6.5.3.1        TLB Entries
The TLB is subdivided into zero or more TLB arrays. Each array must contain TLB entries that share the
same characteristics. Each array contains one or more TLB entries. Each entry has specific fields that
correspond to fields in the MMU assist registers, described in Section 3.12.6, “MMU Assist Registers
(MASn).” Note that in each implementation, architected fields may have restrictions (such as
implementing fewer bits) or enhancements.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                               6-41
Cache and MMU Architecture


6.5.3.2        TLB Entry Page Size
Each TLB entry has a page size associated with it. This defines the how many bytes this particular TLB
entry supports. The possible sizes that are supported by an implementation depends on the TLB array and
is reflected in the associated TLBnCFG register. A TLB entry page size is established by writing a TLB
entry with MAS1[TSIZE] set to a value that represents a page size. Page sizes are defined as power of 4
KB values, thus the size of a page is 4TSIZE KB . Certain bits in the EPN and RPN fields associated with
page offsets should be 0 based on page size. Table 6-5 shows the valid page sizes defined by the
architecture.
                                  NOTE: Software Considerations
                 EIS does not support 1KB or 2KB page sizes.
                                             Table 6-5. TLB Page Sizes

                  TSIZE                                  EPN and RPN Bits      Real Address after
                                    Page Size
                (TLBSIZE)                               Required to be Zero       Translation

                 0b0001               4KB                      none             RPN0:51 || EA52:63

                 0b0010               16KB                     50:51            RPN0:49 || EA50:63

                 0b0011               64KB                     48:51            RPN0:47 || EA48:63

                 0b0100              256KB                     46:51            RPN0:45 || EA46:63

                 0b0101               1MB                      44:51            RPN0:43 || EA44:63

                 0b0110               4MB                      42:51            RPN0:41 || EA42:63

                 0b0111               16MB                     40:51            RPN0:39 || EA40:63

                 0b1000               64MB                     38:51            RPN0:37 || EA38:63

                 0b1001              256MB                     36:51            RPN0:35 || EA36:63

                 0b1010               1GB                      34:51            RPN0:33 || EA34:63

                 0b1011               4GB                      32:51            RPN0:31 || EA32:63

                 0b1100               16GB                     30:51            RPN0:29 || EA30:63

                 0b1101               64GB                     28:51            RPN0:27 || EA28:63

                 0b1110              256GB                     26:51            RPN0:25 || EA26:63
                 0b1111               1TB                      24:51            RPN0:23 || EA24:63


6.5.3.3        Reading and Writing TLB Entries
TLB entries written by software are updated by executing tlbwe instructions. At the time of tlbwe
execution, the MMU assist registers (MAS0–MAS8), are used to select a specific TLB entry. The MAS
registers also contain the information that is written to the selected entry, such that they serve as the ports
into the TLBs, as shown in Figure 6-7. The contents of the MAS registers are described in Section 3.12.6,
“MMU Assist Registers (MASn).”




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-42                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                            Cache and MMU Architecture



                            TLB0             TLB1                   TLBn




                                                                 tlbwe, tlbre, tlbsx, tlbivax,tlbilx


                                       MAS Registers


                    GPR              mtspr          mfspr       GPR

                  Figure 6-7. TLBs Accessed Through MAS Registers and TLB Instructions

Similarly, TLB entries are read by executing tlbre instructions. At the time of tlbre execution, the MAS
registers are used to select a specific TLB entry and upon completion of the tlbre instruction, the MAS
registers contain the contents of the indexed TLB entry. To read or write TLB entries, the MAS registers
are first loaded by system software using mtspr instructions and then the desired tlbre or tlbwe
instructions must be executed.

6.5.3.4        TLB Management using the MAS Registers
This section describes how TLB instructions and MAS registers are used to configure and update the
TLBs.

6.5.3.4.1        MAS Registers
TLB entries are managed by software using a set of SPRs called the MMU assist (MAS) registers. MAS
registers are used to move data between software and the TLB entries. MAS registers are also used to
identify TLB entries and provide default values when translation or protection faults occur. There are 8
MAS registers that are more fully described in Section 3.12.6, “MMU Assist Registers (MASn).”
<64-bit>:
64-bit implementations also provide access to MAS register “pairs” which allows 2 MAS registers to be
accessed with a single mfspr/mtspr instruction. See Section 3.12.6.10, “64-bit Access to MAS Register
Pairs <64-bit, E.HV>.”
<Embedded.Hypervisor>:
MAS5 and MAS8 are only accessible by the hypervisor. MAS5 contains GS and LPID values for searching
TLB entries and MAS8 contains entries that identify the LPID value and GS value associated with a TLB
entry. Hypervisor software should set these registers to values appropriate to the partition which is being
executed.

6.5.3.5        Reading TLB Entries
TLB entries can be read by executing tlbre instructions. At the time of tlbre execution, the MAS registers
are used to select a specific TLB entry and upon completion of the tlbre, the MAS registers contain the
contents of the indexed TLB entry.


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                          6-43
Cache and MMU Architecture


Selection of the TLB entry to read is performed by setting MAS0[TLBSEL], MAS0[ESEL] and
MAS2[EPN] to indicate the entry to read. MAS0[TLBSEL] selects which TLB array the entry should be
read from (0 to 3) and MAS2[EPN] selects the set of entries from which MAS0[ESEL] selects an entry.
For fully associative TLBs, MAS2[EPN] is not required since the value in MAS0[ESEL] fully identifies
the TLB entry. Valid values for MAS0[ESEL] are from 0 to associativity - 1.
When reading a TLB entry, MAS0[ATSEL] must be set to 0. <E.HV.LRAT>
The selected TLB entry is then used to update the following fields of the MAS registers: V, IPROT, TLPID
<E.HV>, TID, TS, TGS <E.HV>, TSIZE, EPN, ACM, VLE <VLE>, WIMGE, VF <E.HV>, RPNU,
RPNL, U0—U3, and permissions. If the TLB array supports NV, it is used to update the NV field in the
MAS registers, otherwise the contents of NV field are undefined. The update of MAS registers as a result
of a tlbre instruction is summarized in Table 6-11.
No operands are given for the tlbre instruction.
Specifying invalid values for MAS0[TLBSEL] and MAS0[ESEL] produce boundedly undefined results.
tlbre is hypervisor privileged if category Embedded.Hypervisor is implemented, otherwise it is supervisor
privileged.
                                        NOTE: Virtualization
                 Hypervisor software must emulate guest executions of tlbre and provide a
                 mapping of the RPN from the TLB entry to a logical address.
                                            NOTE: Architecture
                 tlbre is hypervisor privileged because allowing read access to TLB entries
                 would allow the guest to see the TLB entries of other guests as well as their
                 own true real addresses. The embedded hypervisor privilege interrupt
                 allows the hypervisor to intervene and perform the real-to-logical address
                 translation of the RPN field.

6.5.3.6        Writing TLB Entries
TLB entries can be written by executing tlbwe instructions. At the time of tlbwe execution, the MAS
registers are used to select a specific TLB entry and contain the contents to be written to the selected TLB
entry. Upon completion of the tlbwe instruction, the TLB entry contents of the MAS registers are written
to the selected TLB entry.
Selection of the TLB entry to write is performed by setting MAS0[TLBSEL], MAS0[ESEL] and
MAS2[EPN] to indicate the entry to write. MAS0[TLBSEL] selects which TLB array the entry should be
written to (0 to 3) and MAS2[EPN] selects the set of entries from which MAS0[ESEL] selects an entry.
For fully associative TLBs, MAS2[EPN] is not used to identify a TLB entry since the value in
MAS0[ESEL] fully identifies the TLB entry. Valid values for MAS0[ESEL] are from 0 to associativity
minus 1.
When writing a TLB entry, MAS0[ATSEL] must be set to 0. <E.HV.LRAT>




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-44                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                            Cache and MMU Architecture


The selected TLB entry is then written with following fields of the MAS registers: V, IPROT, TLPID
<E.HV>, TID, TS, TGS <E.HV>, TSIZE, EPN, ACM, VLE <VLE>, WIMGE, VF <E.HV>, RPNU,
RPNL, U0—U3, and permissions. If the TLB array supports NV, it is written with the NV value.
The effects of updating the TLB entry are not guaranteed to be visible to the programming model until the
completion of a context synchronizing operation. Writing a TLB entry that is used by the programming
model prior to a context synchronizing operation produces boundedly undefined behavior.
No operands are given for the tlbwe instruction.
Specifying invalid values for MAS0[TLBSEL] and MAS0[ESEL] produce boundedly undefined results.
The privilege level of executing tlbwe is based on several factors, as shown in this table.
                                          Table 6-6. Privilege Level of Executing tlbwe

   E.HV      E.HV.LRAT
                        TLBnCFG[LRAT] = 1 MSR[GS] MSR[PR] EPCR[DGTMI]                                   Result
Implemented Implemented

        x1               x                     x              x        1           n/a    privilege exception

        no              n/a                   n/a            n/a       0           n/a    write entry

       yes               x                     x              0        0            x     write entry

       yes               x                     x              1        0            1     embedded hypervisor
                                                                                          privilege exception

       yes              no                    n/a             1        0            0     embedded hypervisor
                                                                                          privilege exception

       yes              yes                   no              1        0            0     embedded hypervisor
                                                                                          privilege exception

       yes              yes                   yes             1        0            0     write entry after translating
                                                                                          through LRAT, otherwise
                                                                                          LRAT error exception
1
    x denotes a “don’t care” condition.

                                             NOTE: Virtualization
                    Hypervisor software must emulate guest executions of tlbwe and provide a
                    mapping of the logical address in the RPN field in the MAS registers to a
                    real address.
                                       NOTE: Software Considerations
                    Writing TLB entries should be followed by a context synchronizing
                    instruction (such as an isync or an rfi) before the new entries are to be used
                    by the programming model.

6.5.3.7           Searching TLB Entries
Software may search the MMU by using the TLB Search instruction, tlbsx, which use virtual address
identifiers from the MAS registers instead of the normal translation sources. This allows software to search
address spaces that differ from the current address space. This is useful for handling TLB faults.


             EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                             6-45
Cache and MMU Architecture


To properly execute a search for a TLB entry, software loads MAS registers with virtual address values to
search for as follows:
    • PID value - MAS6[SPID]
    • AS value - MAS6[SAS]
        If category Embedded.Hypervisor is implemented the following are also used:
    • LPID value - MAS5[SLPID]
    • GS value - MAS5[SGS]
Software then executes a tlbsx instruction. The search performs the same TA to VA comparison described
in Section 6.5.4, “Address Translation,” except that the virtual address identifier values are taken from the
MAS registers. If a matching, valid TLB entry is found, the MAS registers are loaded with the information
from that TLB entry as if the TLB entry was read from a tlbre instruction. Software can examine the
MAS1[V] bit to determine if the search was successful. Successful searches cause the valid bit to be set.
Unsuccessful searches cause the valid bit to be clear. Table 6-11 summarizes the update of MAS registers
as a result of a tlbsx instruction.
The preferred form of the tlbsx is rA = 0. Some implementations may take an unimplemented instruction
exception or an illegal instruction exception if rA != 0.

6.5.3.8        Invalidating TLB Entries
This section describes how TLB entries can be invalidated, by any of the following methods:
   • As the result of a tlbwe instruction that clears MAS1[V] in the entry. tlbwe instructions that use
       hardware entry select (HES) to determine which TLB entry is written do not require invalidations
       of the written entry, even if the entry is written with MAS1[V] = 0. <E.PT>
   • As a result of a flash invalidate operation initiated by writing to bits in MMUCSR0 (see
       Section 3.12.3, “MMU Control and Status Register 0 (MMUCSR0)”).
   • As a result of a tlbivax instruction or from a received broadcast invalidation resulting from a
       tlbivax on another processor.
   • As a result of a tlbilx instruction.
Clearing MAS1[V] and writing a specified TLB entry invalidates a single TLB entry. The other methods
invalidate multiple TLB entries, possibly including some TLB entries that match part of the invalidation
criteria. This is referred to as generous invalidation. The scope of how many TLB entries are cleared
beyond the required ones when a generous invalidate occurs is implementation dependent. TLB arrays can
provide the invalidate protect bit (IPROT), which can be set to prevent a TLB entry from being invalidated
as the result of any invalidation, except for clearing the MAS1[V] bit and writing the entry, as described
in Section 6.5.3.8.5, “Generous Invalidates and Invalidation Protection.”
                                   NOTE: Software Considerations
                 Software must assume that any TLB entry not protected by IPROT may be
                 invalidated whenever an invalidation is performed (except when writing the
                 V bit in the TLB entry to 0).




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-46                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


6.5.3.8.1          Invalidation of a Single TLB Entry by Clearing MAS1[V]
A single TLB entry can be invalidated by executing a tlbwe instruction when MAS1[V] = 0, and the entry
is specified by MAS0[TLBSEL], MAS0[ESEL] and MAS2[EPN]. This clears the valid bit for that TLB
entry. This is the only method that can be used to invalidate a TLB entry whose IPROT bit is set.

6.5.3.8.2          Invalidations Using tlbivax
The tlbivax instruction provides a virtual address (EA, MAS6[SPID], MAS6[SAS],
MAS5[SLPID] <E.HV>, and MAS5[SGS] <E.HV>) as a target for invalidation. The virtual address to
select a TLB entry to invalidate is specified as follows:
    • EA[0–51] specifies the effective page number and is compared to the EPN field in the TLB entry.
        The page size of the TLB entry masks the low order bits in the comparison.
    • MAS6[SPID] specifies the effective page number and is compared to the TID field in the TLB
        entry.
    • MAS6[SAS] specifies the effective page number and is compared to the TS field in the TLB entry.
    • MAS5[SLPID] specifies the effective page number and is compared to the TLPID field in the TLB
        entry. <E.HV>
    • MAS5[SGS] specifies the effective page number and is compared to the TGS field in the TLB
        entry. <E.HV>
The comparison is performed only for valid TLB entries in the specified TLB array that do not have the
IPROT attribute set (if supported by the TLB array). The EA specified by the rA and rB operands in the
tlbivax instruction contains fields in the lower order bits to augment the invalidation to specific TLB
arrays and to flash invalidate those arrays. Note that tlbivax instructions do not invalidate any entry that
has IPROT = 1, unless the specified TLB array does not support the IPROT attribute. The encoding of the
EA used by tlbivax is shown in Figure 6-8 and Table 6-7.
The tlbivax invalidation is broadcast to each processor in the coherence domain, performing the
invalidations there as well. To synchronize the effects of the tlbivax globally, the tlbsync instruction is
used to ensure that the invalidation is performed and that all memory accesses which may have translated
prior to the invalidation have been performed.
tlbivax is hypervisor privileged if category Embedded.Hypervisor is implemented, otherwise it is
supervisor privileged.
This figure shows the EA format for tlbivax.

                   0                                                    51 52              58 59   60   61 62 63

  EA for tlbivax                          EA0:51                                   —           TLB      IA   —

                                      Figure 6-8. EA Format for tlbivax

This table describes EA fields for tlbivax.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                          6-47
Cache and MMU Architecture


                                     Table 6-7. Fields for EA Format of tlbivax

                             Field      Name       Comments or Function when Set

                             0–51      EA0:51   The upper bits of the address to invalidate.

                             52–58       —      Reserved, should be cleared.

                             59–60      TLB     Selects TLB array for invalidation.
                                                00 TLB0
                                                01 TLB1
                                                10 TLB2
                                                11 TLB3



                              61         IA     Invalidate all entries in selected TLB array.



                             62–63       —      Reserved, should be cleared.

                                   NOTE: Software Considerations
                To ensure a TLB entry that is not protected by IPROT is invalidated if
                software does not know which TLB array the entry is in, software should
                issue a tlbivax instruction targeting each TLB in the implementation with
                the EA to be invalidated.
                                  NOTE: Software Considerations
                The preferred form of tlbivax contains the entire EA in rB and zero in rA.
                Some implementations may take an unimplemented instruction exception if
                rA is non-zero.
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                Software should avoid using the IA (invalidate all) function by keeping bit
                61 clear because this capability is likely to be removed from future versions
                of the architecture.
                                  NOTE: Software Considerations
                For processors that implement category Embedded.Hypervisor, the
                preferred method of performing invalidations is tlbilx.

6.5.3.8.3       Invalidations Using tlbilx <E.HV>
The tlbilx instruction provides a virtual address or a partial virtual address as a target for invalidation.
Unlike tlbivax, tlbilx only guarantees that invalidations are performed on the processor executing tlbilx
(and are considered local). It is implementation dependent whether any invalidations occur on other
processors. Invalidations are performed based on the T field specified in the tlbilx instruction as follows:
   • If T= 0, all TLB entries for which the TLPID field match MAS5[SLPID] are invalidated. This
       allows all TLB entries belonging to a particular logical partition to be invalidated.



         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-48                                                                                            Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


    •   If T = 1, all TLB entries for which the TLPID field match MAS5[SLPID] and the TID field match
        MAS6[SPID] are invalidated. This allows all TLB entries belonging to a particular process ID
        value to be invalidated.
    •   If T = 3, all TLB entries for which the TLPID field match MAS5[SLPID], the TID field match
        MAS6[SPID], the TGS field match MAS5[SGS], the TS field match MAS6[SAS], and the EPN
        field matches the EA from rA and rB are invalidated. This allows a particular virtual address to be
        invalidated.
The comparison is performed only for valid TLB entries in the specified TLB array that do not have the
IPROT attribute set (if supported by the TLB array). Note that tlbilx instructions do not invalidate any
entry that has IPROT = 1, unless the specified TLB array does not support the IPROT attribute.
tlbilx is guest supervisor privileged unless EPCR[DGTMI] is set in which case it is hypervisor privileged.
                                     NOTE: Software Considerations
                Note that tlbilx only guarantees invalidations on the local processor.
                Software must arrange to execute the appropriate tlbilx on all processors of
                interest in order to perform the invalidation globally. This will generally be
                accomplished using an IPC type interrupt such as a doorbell generated by a
                msgsnd instruction.

6.5.3.8.4       Invalidate all Using MMUCSR0
All entries in a TLB array are invalidated by setting the corresponding invalidate all bit
(MMUCSR0[TLBn_FI]). MMUCSR0 is described in Section 3.12.3, “MMU Control and Status
Register 0 (MMUCSR0).” Invalidation is complete when the processor core clears the corresponding
invalidate all bit. Writing a 0 to an MMUCSR0 invalidate all bit has no effect. Note that such invalidations
do not invalidate any entry that has IPROT = 1.

6.5.3.8.5       Generous Invalidates and Invalidation Protection
Generous invalidates can occur because parts of the translation mechanism may not be fully specified to
the hardware at invalidate time. So, in the case of a set-associative TLB array, it may be that all indexed
entries (all ways) in the TLB array for a particular effective address are invalidated as a result of a tlbivax.
In SMP systems, the tlbivax generates an invalidation address that is broadcast to all processors in the
system. and the hardware implementation may impose other caveats causing additional invalidations. The
architecture assures that the intended TLB is invalidated, but does not guarantee it is the only one.
Protecting against generous invalidation is necessary because certain effective memory regions must
always be properly mapped. For example, the instruction memory region that serves as the exception
handler for MMU faults must always be mapped, otherwise, an MMU exception cannot be handled
because the first address of the handler causes another MMU exception.
To prevent generous invalidation, the invalidate protection (IPROT) bit can be set to protect the
corresponding entry from any invalidation other than directly writing the V field to 0. TLB entries with
the IPROT bit set can only be invalidated by explicitly writing the TLB entry and specifying a 0 for the
valid bit.


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     6-49
Cache and MMU Architecture


Operating systems must use care when using protected TLB entries, particularly in SMP systems. An SMP
system that contains protected (IPROT = 1) TLB entries on other processors requires a synchronization
mechanism such as a cross-processor interrupt to ensure that each processor performs the required
invalidation by clearing the valid bits of its own TLB entries (using tlbwe) in a synchronized way with
respect to the other processors in the system.
                                      NOTE: Software Considerations
                Note that not all TLB arrays in a given device implement the IPROT
                attribute. It is likely that implementations that are suitable for demand-page
                environments implement IPROT for only a single array, while not
                implementing it for other on-chip TLB arrays. See the user documentation.



6.5.4        Address Translation
The effective address (EA) is the untranslated address for a data or instruction fetch address that is
calculated as a result of a load, store, or cache management instruction. The EA is combined with address
space identifiers to form a virtual address (VA) . The VA contains these specific elements: EA, AS, PID,
LPID <E.HV>, GS <E.HV> as described in Section 6.5.2, “Virtual Address (VA).”
A program references memory by using an effective address (EA) computed by the processor when it
executes a load, store, cache management, branch or other control flow-control instruction, and when it
fetches the next instruction. Because TID and TLPID <E.HV> values can contain the value 0 and thus
match any LPID value or LPID value respectively, additional VAs are formed using the permutation of 0
values for these fields. For example, an implementation that does not implement category
Embedded.Hypervisor and only implements one PID register (PID) would form the following virtual
addresses for translation:
    VA0 ← AS || 0 || EA
    VA1 ← AS || PID || EA


The value of 0 for a possible match with the TID field allows a TLB entry with a value of 0 in the TID
field to match all PID values. Note that VAs may be non-unique. There may be duplicate VAs formed,
however such duplicated VAs are ignored. In this particular case if the PID value from the PID register
was equal to 0, VA0 and VA1 would be the same VA. In this case, only one of the VAs is considered for
translation and the other is ignored.
Virtual addresses are formed differently based on whether the processor implements category
Embedded.Hypervisor, category Embedded.External PID, or more than one PID register. When category
Embedded.Hypervisor is implemented, non Embedded.External PID data accesses and all instruction
fetches form the following virtual addresses:
    VA0 ← GS || LPIDR || AS || PID || EA
    VA1 ← GS ||   0   || AS || PID || EA
    VA2 ← GS || LPIDR || AS || 0 || EA
    VA3 ← GS ||   0   || AS || 0 || EA




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-50                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                       Cache and MMU Architecture


These VAs are a result of the permutation of LPIDR, a zero value for LPIDR, PID, and a zero value for
PID. The concept of multiple virtual addresses is a more formal way of specifying how translation is
performed. In practice, the TLB entries for TLPID and TID simply perform a “don’t care” condition when
comparing with LPIDR and PID if TLPID or TID contain zero values. Note also in the above example,
that if GS and LPIDR are always 0 (that is, the operating system is running bare-metal and has no
knowledge of hypervisor capabilities), that the VAs that are formed are the same VAs that would be formed
if category Embedded.Hypervisor was not present.
<Embedded.External PID>:
When a category Embedded.External PID instruction makes a storage reference, all the parts of a virtual
address except the EA are taken from the EPLC or EPSC register depending on whether the storage access
is a load or a store. The virtual addresses that are formed are as follows:
(for External PID loads)
   VA0 ← EPLC[EGS] || EPLC[ELPID] || EPLC[EAS] || EPLC[EPID] || EA
   VA1 ← EPLC[EGS] ||      0      || EPLC[EAS] || EPLC[EPID] || EA
   VA2 ← EPLC[EGS] || EPLC[ELPID] || EPLC[EAS] ||     0      || EA
   VA3 ← EPLC[EGS] ||      0      || EPLC[EAS] ||     0      || EA

(for External PID stores)
   VA0 ← EPSC[EGS] || EPSC[ELPID] || EPSC[EAS] || EPSC[EPID] || EA
   VA1 ← EPSC[EGS] ||      0      || EPSC[EAS] || EPSC[EPID] || EA
   VA2 ← EPSC[EGS] || EPSC[ELPID] || EPSC[EAS] ||     0      || EA
   VA3 ← EPSC[EGS] ||      0      || EPSC[EAS] ||     0      || EA

Earlier versions of the architecture permitted multiple PID registers to be implemented. On
implementations that provide multiple PID registers, more virtual addresses are formed using the
permutation of PID0, PID1, .. PIDn and the zero value for the PID value.
Each of the unique VAs are compared to all of the valid TLB entries by comparing specific fields of each
TLB entry to each of the VAs. The fields of each valid (TLB[V] = 1) TLB entry are combined to form a
set of matching TLB addresses (TAs):
   TA ← TLB[TS] || TLB[TID] || TLB[EPN] || 120

or if category Embedded.Hypervisor is implemented:
   TA ← TLB[TGS] || TLB[TLPID] || TLB[TS] || TLB[TID] || TLB[EPN] || 120

Each TA is compared to all VAs under a mask based on the page size (TLB[SIZE]) of the TLB entry. The
mask of the comparison of the EA and EPN portions of the virtual and translation addresses is computed
as follows:
        mask ← ~(1024 << (2 * TLB[SIZE])) - 1)

where the number of bits in the mask equals the number of bits in a TA (or VA). If a TA matches any VA,
the TLB entry is said to match. Multiple matches are considered a serious programming error, and results
are undefined. The recommended behavior is that a machine check interrupt be taken.
When a match occurs, the matching TLB is used for access control, storage attributes, and
effective-to-physical address translation. Access control, storage attributes, and address translation are
defined by the architecture.

         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                     6-51
Cache and MMU Architecture


6.5.4.1        Match Criteria for TLB Entries
TLB arrays contain TLB entries that are used to match any address presented for translation. All TLB
entries for any given implementation are candidates for any given translation. The TLB itself is unordered
with respect to the various elements used in address translations, and regardless of implementation, should
be considered to perform the translation comparison with all entries in parallel.
There should be only one valid matching translation for a given TA and unique VA. It is considered a
programming error for a TLB to contain multiple matching entries. The behavior of any such translation
is undefined; the processor is may take a machine check interrupt or produce undefined results.
As shown in Figure 6-9, the following fields are compared in the TLB entries:
   • V—The matching entry must have the V bit set.
   • TGS <E.HV>—The guest space identifier used for translation. The MSR[GS] bit must match the
      TGS bit for a matching entry
   • TLPID <E.HV>—The contents of the LPIDR register must match the TLPID field of a matching
      entry, or the TLPID field must be all zeros for a matching entry.
   • TS—The address space identifier used for translation. The appropriate bit of MSR[IS] or
      MSR[DS] must match the TS bit for a matching entry.
   • TID—The contents of the PID register must match the TID field of a matching entry, or the TID
      field must be all zeros for a matching entry.
   • EPN—The appropriate number of bits (depending on the page size) of the effective address being
      translated is compared to the EPN field of the TLB entry.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-52                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                         Cache and MMU Architecture


This figure shows the translation match logic for the EA plus its attributes (collectively called the virtual
address) and how it is compared with the corresponding fields in the TLB entries.
   TLB_entry[V]
                         load                                                                  TLB entry matches
                            or      Ext PID                                                    virtual address
                          store        or
                                  non-Ext PID data
                                                or
       EPLC[EGS]
                                              fetch
       EPSC[EGS]
                       MSR[GS]

                                                       =?
   TLB_entry[TGS]
                          load
                            or      Ext PID
                          store        or
                                  non-Ext PID data
                                                or
      EPLC[ELPID]                             fetch
      EPSC[ELPID]
                         LPIDR

                                                       =?
   TLB_entry[TLPID]
                          load                              =0?
                            or      Ext PID
                          store        or
                                  non-Ext PID data
                                                or
        EPLC[EAS]
                                              fetch
        EPSC[EAS]

             AS    {   MSR[DS]
                        MSR[IS]
                                                       =?
   TLB_entry[TS]
                          load
                            or      Ext PID
                          store        or
                                  non-Ext PID data
                                                or
        EPLC[EPID]
                                              fetch
       EPSC[EPID]
                            PID

    TLB_entry[TID]                                     =?

                                                            =0?


     TLB_entry[EPN]
                                                             =?
                          (EA>>12 & page mask)
              (EA page bits based on page size)

                                  Figure 6-9. Virtual Address and TLB-Entry Comparison




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       6-53
Cache and MMU Architecture


6.5.4.2         Real Address Generation after a TLB Match
If a match occurs on all the fields listed in Section 6.5.4.1, “Match Criteria for TLB Entries,” the real
address is formed by combining TLB[RPN] with the lower order offset bits of the EA based on the page
size of the TLB entry (where ‘mask’ contains the same number of bits as a real address).
    mask ← ~(1024 << (2 * TLB[TSIZE])) - 1)
    real_address ← ((TLB[RPN] << 12) & mask) | (EA & ~mask)

The real address is then used to access the memory subsystem using the
TLB[ACM,VLE <VLE>,W,I,M,G,E] fields from the TLB entry to determine how the location should be
accessed.
The generation of the real address occurs as shown in Figure 6-10. n denotes which bits are part of the page
offset or the page number. n = 54 - (2 * TLB[TSIZE]).

                       MSR[GS], EPLC[EAS], or EPSC[EAS]

                              LPIDR, EPLC[ELPID], or EPSC[ELPID]

                                       MSR[IS], MSR[DS], EPLC[EAS], or EPSC[EAS]
                                          PID, EPLC[EPID], or EPSC[EPID]
                                                              64(32)-bit effective address

                  GS     LPID     AS    PID            Effective Page Number (EPN)                   Offset
                                              0 (32)                                         n–1 n            63
                                                           Virtual Address

                    Notes:                                          TLB
               For n, see above                                 multiple-entry
            GS and LPID are <E.HV>
          EPLC and EPSC are <E.PD>                       RPN field of matching entry
       #PA = number of physical addr bits
       (32) denotes 32-bit implementation
                                                         Real Page Number (RPN)                      Offset
                                              64 - #PA                                       n–1 n            63


                                                                     Real Address

                                Figure 6-10. Effective-to-Real Address Translation



6.5.4.3         Page Size and Effective Address Bits Compared
The page size defined for a TLB entry determines how many bits of the effective address are compared
with the corresponding EPN field in the TLB entry as shown in Table 6-10.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-54                                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


6.5.4.4        Permission Attribute Comparison
As part of the translation process, the selected TLB entry provides the access permission bits (UX, SX,
UW, SW, UR, SR), and memory/cache attributes (ACM, VLE<VLE>, W, I, M, G, and E) for the access.
These bits specify whether an access is allowed and how it is to be performed.
If a matching TLB entry is identified, an architecturally defined access permission mechanism selectively
grants shared access, grants execute access, grants read access, grants write access, and prohibits access to
areas of memory based on a various criteria. TLB entry permission bits are as follows:
     • SR—Supervisor read permission
     • SW—Supervisor write permission
     • SX—Supervisor execute permission
     • UR—User read permission
     • UW—User write permission
     • UX—User execute permission
If the virtual address translation comparison with TLB entries succeeds, the permission bits for the
matching entry are checked as shown in Figure 6-11. If the access is not allowed, the processor generates
an instruction or data storage interrupt.

             TLB match (see Figure 6-9)
                                                                                       access granted
                                            MSR[PR]
                                     instruction fetch
                                       TLB_entry[UX]

                                      TLB_entry[SX]
                               load-class data access
                                       TLB_entry[UR]

                                      TLB_entry[SR]
                              store-class data access
                                       TLB_entry[UW]

                                      TLB_entry[SW]

                                  Figure 6-11. Granting of Access Permission

The permission attributes are defined in detail in Section 6.5.6, “Permission Attributes.”

6.5.4.5        Translation Algorithms
The following algorithm describes how translation operates:
   ea I effective address
   if translation is an instruction address then
      as I MSRIS
      gs I MSRGS
      pid I PID
      lpid I LPIDR
   else                    // data address translation
      if external PID instruction


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-55
Cache and MMU Architecture

             if external PID load instruction
                  as I EPLCEAS
                  gs I EPLCEGS
                  pid I EPLCEPID
                  lpid I EPLCELPID
             else              // external PID store instruction
                  as I EPLCEAS
                  gs I EPLCEGS
                  pid I EPLCEPID
                  lpid I EPLCELPID
        else                   // normal load/store instruction
             as I MSRIS
             gs I MSRGS
             pid I PID
             lpid I LPIDR

    for all TLB entries
       if ! TLBV | (as != TLBTS) | (gs != TLBTGS) then
           next             // not valid or no addr space match
       if (TLBTID != 0) & (TLBTID != pid) then
           next             // no 0 for TID or no PID match
       if (TLBTLPID != 0) & (TLBTLPID != lpid) then
           next             // no 0 for TLPID or no LPID match
       mask I ~((1024 << (2 * TLBTSIZE)) - 1)
       if (ea & mask) != (TLBEPN << 12) then
           next             // no address match
       real address I (TLBRPN << 12) | (ea & ~mask)
       end translation -- success
    endfor
    if translation is an instruction address then
       instruction TLB error interrupt
    else
       data TLB error interrupt

If translation is successful, the algorithm for the granting of permission is as follows:
    if MSRPR = 0 then
       x ← TLBSX
       r ← TLBSR
       w ← TLBSW
    else
       x ← TLBUX
       r ← TLBUR
       w ← TLBUW

    if instruction_fetch & x = 0 then
       instruction storage interrupt)
    else if load &         r = 0 | TLBVF then
       data storage interrupt
    else if store &        w = 0 | TLBVF then
       data storage interrupt
    else
       access permitted


6.5.5        Access Control
If address translation results in a match (hit), the matching TLB entry is used to perform access control
(permission checks). These checks are based on the privilege level of the access (MSR[PR]) and the type
of access (fetch for execute, read for loads, and write for stores). The TLB entry’s permission bits
(TLB[US,SX,UW,SW,UR,SR]) determine whether the operation should succeed. If permission is denied,


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-56                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                           Cache and MMU Architecture


execution of the instruction is suppressed and an instruction or data storage interrupt occurs. Software uses
the ESR, SRR0, and DEAR to determine the type of operation attempted, and then must perform a TLB
search if updating the TLB is desired.

6.5.5.1        Page Size and Real Address Generation
If no virtual address match occurs, the translation fails and a TLB miss exception occurs, generating the
appropriate instruction or data TLB error interrupt. Otherwise, the real page number (RPN) field of the
matching TLB entry provides the translation for the effective address. Based on the setting of the TSIZE
field of the matching TLB entry, the RPN field replaces the n corresponding msbs of the effective address
where n = 54 - (2 * TSIZE). 32-bit implementations do not use the upper 32 bits of EA. Note that the
untranslated bits must be zero in the RPN field. Real address generation based on page size is shown in
Table 6-8.
                                       Table 6-8. Real Address Generation

                                       64-Bit Implementations                   32-Bit Implementations
     TSIZE       Page Size
     Field     (4TSIZEKbytes)   RPN Bits that                            RPN Bits that
                                                    Real Address                               Real Address
                                Must Equal 0                             Must Equal 0

     0b0001        4 Kbyte          None        RPN[0–51] || EA[52–63]       None        RPN[32–51] || EA[52–63]

     0b0010       16 Kbyte      RPN[50–51] = 0 RPN[0–49] || EA[50–63] RPN[50–51] = 0 RPN[32–49] || EA[50–63]

     0b0011       64 Kbyte      RPN[48–51] = 0 RPN[0–47] || EA[48–63] RPN[48–51] = 0 RPN[32–47] || EA[48–63]

     0b0100      256 Kbyte      RPN[46–51] = 0 RPN[0–45] || EA[46–63] RPN[46–51] = 0 RPN[32–45] || EA[46–63]

     0b0101       1 Mbyte       RPN[44–51] = 0 RPN[0–43] || EA[44–63] RPN[44–51] = 0 RPN[32–43] || EA[44–63]

     0b0110       4 Mbyte       RPN[42–51] = 0 RPN[0–41] || EA[42–63] RPN[42–51] = 0 RPN[32–41] || EA[42–63]

     0b0111       16 Mbyte      RPN[40–51] = 0 RPN[0–39] || EA[40–63] RPN[40–51] = 0 RPN[32–39] || EA[40–63]
     0b1000       64 Mbyte      RPN[38–51] = 0 RPN[0–37] || EA[38–63] RPN[38–51] = 0 RPN[32–37] || EA[38–63]

     0b1001      256 Mbyte      RPN[36–51] = 0 RPN[0–35] || EA[36–63] RPN[36–51] = 0 RPN[32–35] || EA[36–63]

     0b1010       1 Gbyte       RPN[34–51] = 0 RPN[0–33] || EA[34–63] RPN[34–51] = 0 RPN[32–33] || EA[34–63]
     0b1011       4 Gbyte       RPN[32–51] = 0 RPN[0–31] || EA[32–63]                      —

     0b1100       16 Gbyte      RPN[30–51] = 0 RPN[0–29] || EA[30–63]                      —

     0b1101       64 Gbyte      RPN[28–51] = 0 RPN[0–27] || EA[28–63]                      —

     0b1110      256 Gbyte      RPN[26–51] = 0 RPN[0–25] || EA[26–63]                      —

     0b1111        1 Tbyte      RPN[24–51] = 0 RPN[0–23] || EA[24–63]                      —




6.5.6         Permission Attributes
The permission attributes are shown in this table, and described in the following subsections.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                            6-57
Cache and MMU Architecture


              Table 6-9. Permission Control for Instruction, Data Read, and Data Write Accesses

                                       TLB[UX]   TLB[SX]     TLB[UR]     TLB[SR]     TLB[UW]     TLB[SW]
         Access Type         MSR[PR]
                                       0     1    0     1    0     1     0     1     0     1     0     1

       Instruction fetch        0      —     —   ISI    √    —     —     —     —     —     —     —     —

                                1      ISI   √   —     —     —     —     —     —     —     —     —     —

       Data read (load)         0      —     —   —     —     —     —    DSI    √     —     —     —     —

                                1      —     —   —     —    DSI    √     —     —     —     —     —     —

       Data write (store)       0      —     —   —     —     —     —     —     —     —     —    DSI    √

                                1      —     —   —     —     —     —     —     —    DSI    √     —     —


6.5.6.1         Execute Access Permission
The UX and SX bits of the TLB entry control execute access to the corresponding page.
Instructions may be fetched and executed from a page in memory if MSR[PR] = 1 (user mode) if the UX
access control bit for that page is set. If the UX access control bit is cleared, instructions from that page
are not fetched and they are not placed into any cache while the processor is in user mode.
Instructions may be fetched and executed from a page in memory if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode) and
the SX access control bit for that page is set. If the SX access control bit is cleared, instructions from that
page are not fetched and are not placed into any cache while the processor is in supervisor mode.
If the sequential execution model calls for the execution of an instruction from a page that is not enabled for
execution (that is, UX = 0 when MSR[PR] = 1 or SX = 0 when MSR[PR] = 0), an execute access control
exception-type instruction storage interrupt is taken.

6.5.6.2         Read Access Permission
The UR and SR bits of the TLB entry control read access to the corresponding page.
Load operations (including load-class cache management instructions) are permitted from a page in
memory while the processor is in user mode (MSR[PR] = 1) if the UR access control bit for that page is
set. If the UR access control bit is cleared, execution of the load instruction is suppressed and a read access
control exception-type data storage interrupt is taken.
Similarly, load operations (including load-class cache management instructions) are permitted from a page
in memory if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode) and the SR access control bit for that page is set. If the SR
access control bit is cleared, execution of the load instruction is suppressed and a read access control
exception-type data storage interrupt is taken.

6.5.6.3         Write Access Permission
The UW and SW bits of the TLB entry control write access to the corresponding page.
Store operations (including store-class cache management instructions) are permitted to a page in memory
if MSR[PR] = 1 (user mode) and the UW access control bit for that page is set. If the UW access control

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-58                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


bit is cleared, execution of the store instruction is suppressed and a write access control exception-type
data storage interrupt is taken.
Similarly, store operations (including store-class cache management instructions) are permitted to a page
in memory if MSR[PR] = 0 (supervisor mode) and the SW access control bit for that page is set. If the SW
access control bit is cleared, execution of the store instruction is suppressed and a write access control
exception-type data storage interrupt is taken.

6.5.6.4         Permission Control and Cache Management Instructions
The dcbi, dcbz, dcbzep <E.PD>, dcbzl <DEO>, and dcbzlep <E.PD, DEO> instructions are treated as
stores because they can change data (or cause loss of data by invalidating a modified line). As such, they
both can cause write access control exception-type DSIs.
Although dcba and dcbal <DEO> can change data, is treated as a store, and can cause write access
control exceptions, these exceptions do not result in a data storage interrupt. If a permission violation
occurs, the instruction executes, but the allocate operation is cancelled (essentially, a no-op).
The icbi and icbiep <E.PD> instructions are treated as a load with respect to permissions checking. As
such, it can cause a read access control exception-type data storage interrupt. It is implementation
dependent whether execute access (UX or SX depending on MSR[PR]) is sufficient access permission for
icbi and icbiep <E.PD>.
The dcbt, dcbtst, dcbtep <E.PD>, dcbtstep <E.PD>, and icbt instructions are treated as loads with
respect to permissions checking and can cause read access control exceptions. However, such exceptions
do not result in data storage interrupts. If a permission violation occurs, the instruction executes, but the
operation is cancelled (essentially, a no-op). It is implementation dependent whether execute access (UX
or SX depending on MSR[PR]) is sufficient access permission for icbt
The dcbf, dcbfep <E.PD>, dcbst, and dcbstep <E.PD> instructions are treated as loads with respect to
permissions checking. Flushing or storing a line from the cache is not considered a store because the store
has already been performed to update the cache and the instruction is only updating the copy in main
memory. Like load instructions, these instructions can cause read access control exception-type data
storage interrupts.
This table summarizes exceptions caused by cache management instructions due to permissions violations.
                            Table 6-10. Permission Control and Cache Instructions

  Instruction   Can Cause Read Permission Violation Exception? Can Cause Write Permission Violation Exception?

     dcba                             No                                              Yes1
     dcbal                            No                                              Yes1
    <DEO>
     dcbf                             Yes                                              No
   dcbfep                             Yes                                              No
   <E.PD>
     dcbi                             No                                              Yes
    dcbst                             Yes                                              No




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-59
Cache and MMU Architecture


                        Table 6-10. Permission Control and Cache Instructions (continued)

    Instruction    Can Cause Read Permission Violation Exception? Can Cause Write Permission Violation Exception?

     dcbstep                            Yes                                                 No
     <E.PD>
        dcbt                            Yes1                                                No
      dcbtep                            Yes1                                                No
      <E.PD>
       dcbtst                           Yes1                                                No
                                              1
     dcbtstep                           Yes                                                 No
      <E.PD>
       dcbz                              No                                                 Yes
      dcbzep                             No                                                 Yes
      <E.PD>
      dcbzepl                            No                                                 Yes
    <E.PD,DEO>
        dcbzl                            No                                                 Yes
       <DEO>
        icbi                            Yes                                                 No
       icbiep                           Yes                                                 No
      <E.PD>
        icbt                            Yes1                                                No
1
    dcba, dcbal <DEO>, dcbt, dcbtst, dcbtep <E.PD>, dcbtstep <E.PD>, and icbt may cause a read access control exception
    but do not result in a data storage interrupt.


6.5.6.5           Use of Permissions to Maintain Page History
The TLB entry definition does not include bits for maintaining page history information. Software can use
TLB entry bits U0–U3 to store history information, but implementations may ignore these bits internally.
System software can implement page changed bit status by disabling write permissions to all pages. The
first attempt to write to the page causes a data storage interrupt. At this point, system software can record
the page changed bit in memory, update the TLB entry permission to allow writes to that page, and return
to the user program allowing further writes to the page to proceed without causing an exception.

6.5.7             Crossing Page Boundaries
Care must be taken with single instruction accesses (load/stores) that cross page boundaries. Examples are
lmw and stmw instructions and misaligned accesses on implementations that support misaligned
load/stores. Architecturally, each of the parts of the access that cross the natural boundary of the access
size (half word, word, double word) are treated separately with respect to exception conditions.
Additionally, these types of instructions may optionally partially complete. For example, a store word
instruction that crosses a page boundary because it is misaligned to the last half word of a page might
actually store the first 16 bits because the access was permitted, but produce a DSI or data TLB error
exception because the second 16 bits in the next page were invalid or protected. An implementation may
suppress the first 16-bit store or perform it.

           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-60                                                                                              Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                        Cache and MMU Architecture


6.5.8        MMU Exception Handling
When translation-related exceptions occur, hardware preloads the MAS registers with information that the
interrupt handler likely needs to handle the fault. For a TLB miss exception, some MAS register fields are
loaded with default information specified in MAS4. System software should set up the default information
in MAS4 before allowing exceptions. In most cases, system software sets this up once depending on its
scheme for handling page faults. This simplifies translation-related exception handling. The following
subsections detail specific MAS register fields and the contents loaded for each exception type.

6.5.8.1        TLB Miss Exception Types
A TLB miss exception is caused when a virtual address for an access does not match with that of any
on-chip TLB entry. This condition causes one of the following:
   • An instruction TLB error interrupt
   • A data TLB error interrupt

6.5.8.1.1        Instruction TLB Error Interrupt Settings
An instruction TLB error interrupt occurs when the virtual address associated with an instruction address
(fetch) causes a TLB miss exception (that is, the address for the instruction cannot be translated). In
addition to the values automatically written to the MAS registers (described in Section 6.5.8.1.3, “TLB
Miss Exception MAS Register Settings”), the save/restore register 0 (SRR0 or GSRR0 <E.HV>) contains
the address of the instruction that caused the instruction TLB error. This register is used to identify the
effective address for handling the exception as well as the address to return to when system software has
resolved the exception condition by writing a new TLB entry.

6.5.8.1.2        Data TLB Error Interrupt Settings
A data TLB error interrupt occurs when the virtual address associated with a data reference from a load,
store, or cache management instruction causes a TLB miss exception (that is, the address of the data item
of a load or store instruction cannot be translated). In addition to the values automatically written to the
MAS registers (described in Section 6.5.8.1.3, “TLB Miss Exception MAS Register Settings”), the
effective address of the data access that caused the exception is automatically loaded in the data exception
address register (DEAR or GDEAR <E.HV>). Also, save/restore register 0 (SRR0 or GSRR0 <E.HV>)
contains the address of the instruction that caused the data TLB error and its value is used to identify the
address to return to when system software has resolved the exception condition (by writing a new TLB
entry).

6.5.8.1.3        TLB Miss Exception MAS Register Settings
When either an instruction or data TLB error interrupt occurs, the TLB information and selection fields of
the MAS registers are loaded with default values from other MAS registers to assist in processing the
exception. The intention is that the common case of a page fault generally requires only system software
to load the RPN (corresponding to the physical address that will be used for this page), and the access
permissions and the defaults can be used for the remaining MAS fields.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      6-61
Cache and MMU Architecture


The processor may use the next victim (NV) field from the TLB array to select which TLB entry should
be used for the new translation. The method used to select the candidate TLB for replacement (the next
victim) is implementation-dependent and may vary on different Freescale implementations. In any case,
software is free to choose any TLB entry for the replacement (software can overwrite the value in
MAS0[ESEL]).
The EIS defines the fields set in the MAS registers at exception time for an instruction or data TLB error
interrupt as shown in Table 6-11.

6.5.8.2        Permissions Violation Exception Types
A permissions violation exception (read access control, write access control, or execute access exception)
is caused when a virtual address for an access matches a TLB entry but the permission attributes in the
matching TLB entry do not allow the access to proceed, as described in Section 6.5.6, “Permission
Attributes.” This condition causes an instruction or data storage interrupt.

6.5.8.2.1        Virtualization Fault Exceptions <E.HV>
A virtualization fault is a special kind of permissions violation. When the VF bit is set in a matching TLB
entry during translation, a virtualization fault exception occurs and if it is the highest priority exception
condition, the processor takes a data storage interrupt which is always directed to the hypervisor. The
hypervisor uses this capability to create TLB entries for accesses that it may wish to emulate.
                                    NOTE: Software Considerations
                 Using the VF bit in TLB entries allows the hypervisor to create “virtual
                 devices” which it can emulate.

6.5.8.2.2        Instruction Storage Interrupt Settings
An instruction storage interrupt occurs when the virtual address associated with an instruction address
(fetch) matches a valid entry in the TLB, but an execute access control exception occurs. Save/restore
register 0 (SRR0 or GSRR0 <E.HV>) contains the address of the instruction that caused the instruction
storage interrupt and its value is used to identify the address to return to when system software has resolved
the exception condition (by writing a new TLB entry).

6.5.8.2.3        Data Storage Interrupt Settings
A data storage interrupt occurs when the virtual address associated with a data reference from a load or
store instruction matches a valid entry in the TLB but one of the following exceptions occur:
    • read access control exception
    • write access control exception
    • virtualization fault exception <E.HV>
In this case, the effective address of the data access that caused the exception is contained in the data
exception address register (DEAR or GDEAR <E.HV>) is used by system software to identify the address
that caused the exception. Also, save/restore register 0 (SRR0 or GSRR0 <E.HV>) contains the address



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-62                                                                                      Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                               Cache and MMU Architecture


of the instruction that caused the data storage interrupt and its value is used to identify the address to return
to when system software has resolved the exception condition by writing a new TLB entry.

6.5.8.3          MAS Register Updates for Exceptions, tlbsx, and tlbre
Table 6-11 summarizes how MAS register are updated by hardware for each stimulus. Note that an
implementations may further define how certain MAS fields are set on exceptions.
The table can be interpreted as follows:
   • A field name refers to a MAS register field.
   • PID, MSR, EPLC <E.HV>, and EPSC <E.HV> refer to their respective registers.
   • EA refers to the effective address used for the memory access which caused a TLB error (miss).
   • The TLB entry specified by TLBSEL and ESEL is referred to as TLB.
                                    Table 6-11. MMU Assist Register Field Updates

                 Inst TLB Error
MAS Field                                         tlbsx Hit                 tlbsx Miss                   tlbre
                 Data TLB Error

                                                              MAS0

 TLBSEL      TLBSELD                 which TLB array hit             TLBSELD                              —

   ESEL      if TLBSELD supports entry that hit                      if TLBSELD supports                  —
             NV:                                                     NV:
                hint]                                                   hint
             else                                                    else
                undefined                                               undefined

    NV       if TLBSELD supports if TLBSEL supports NV:              if TLBSELD supports if TLBSEL supports NV:
             NV:                    NV                               NV:                    NV
                next NV          else                                   next NV          else
             else                   undefined                        else                   undefined
                undefined                                               undefined

                                                              MAS1

  IPROT      0                       If TLB that hits supports IPROT: 0                    If TLB that hits supports IPROT:
                                        TLB[IPROT]                                            TLB[IPROT]
                                     else                                                  else
                                        0                                                     0


    TID      if ext PID load         TLB[TID]                        SPID                  TLB[TID]
                EPLC[EPID]
             elseif ext PID store
                EPSC[EPID]
             else
                PID

  TSIZE      TSIZED                  TLB[TSIZE]                      TSIZED                TLB[TSIZE]




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                               6-63
Cache and MMU Architecture


                              Table 6-11. MMU Assist Register Field Updates (continued)

                   Inst TLB Error
MAS Field                                           tlbsx Hit                tlbsx Miss                tlbre
                   Data TLB Error

       TS      if Data TLB Error         TLB[TS]                       SAS                TLB[TS]
                  if ext PID load
                     EPLC[EAS]
                  elseif ext PID store
                     EPSC[EAS]
                  else
                     MSR[DS]
               else
                  MSR[IS]

       V       1                         1                             0                  TLB[V]


                                                                MAS2

  WIMGE         WIMGED                   TLB[WIMGE]                    WIMGED             TLB[WIMGE]


   VLE         VLED                      TLB[VLE]                      VLED               TLB[VLE]
  <VLE>

   ACM         ACMD                      TLB[ACM]                      ACMD               TLB[ACM]


  X0, X1       X0D, X1D                  TLB[X0, X1]                   X0D, X1D           TLB[X0,X1]


 EPN[0:31]     EA[0:31] of access    if MSR[CM] = 0                               —       if MSR[CM] = 0
                                        undefined                                            undefined
               Note: if MSR[CM] = 0, else                                                 else
               then EA[0:31] must be TLB[EPN[0:31]]                                          TLB[EPN[0:31]]
               0.

EPN[32:51]     EA[32:51] of access       TLB[EPN[32:51]]                          —       TLB[EPN[32:51]]


                                                                MAS3

UR,SR,UW, Zeros                          TLB[UR,SR,UW,SW,UX,SX]        Zeros              TLB[UR,SR,UW,SW,UX,SX]
SW,UX,SX

  U0–U3        Zeros                     TLB[U0-U3]                    Zeros              TLB[U0-U3]


   RPNL        Zeros                     TLB[RPN[32:51]]               Zeros              TLB[RPN[32:51]]


                                                                MAS4

WIMGED,                   —                            —                          —                     —
X0D,X1D,
TIDSELD,
TLBSELD,
 TSIZED

  VLED                    —                            —                          —                     —
  <VLE>



            EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-64                                                                                            Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                             Cache and MMU Architecture


                            Table 6-11. MMU Assist Register Field Updates (continued)

                Inst TLB Error
MAS Field                                           tlbsx Hit                tlbsx Miss                tlbre
                Data TLB Error

  ACMD                  —                              —                         —                      —

                                                           MAS5 <E.HV>

   SGS                  —                              —                         —                      —
  <E.HV>

   SLPID                —                              —                         —                      —
  <E.HV>

                                                                MAS6

   SAS       if Data TLB Error                         —                         —                      —
                if ext PID load
                   EPLC[EAS]
                elseif ext PID store
                   EPSC[EAS]
                else
                   MSR[DS]
             else
                MSR[IS]

   SPID      if ext PID load                           —                         —                      —
                EPLC[EPID]
             elseif ext PID store
                EPSC[EPID]
             else
                PID

                                                                MAS7

  RPNU       Zeros                     TLB[RPN[0:31]]                    Zeros            TLB[RPN[0:31]]


                                                           MAS8 <E.HV>

   TGS                  —              TLB[TGS]                                  —        TLB[TGS]
  <E.HV>

    VF                  —              TLB[VF]                                   —        TLB[VF]
  <E.HV>

   TLPID                —              TLB[TLPID]                                —        TLB[TLPID]
  <E.HV>




6.5.9        MMU Configuration Information
Information about the configuration for a given TLB implementation is available to system software by
reading the contents of the MMU configuration SPRs. These SPRs describe the architectural version of
the MMU, the number of TLB arrays, and the characteristics of each TLB array.
    • MMU configuration register (MMUCFG) contains basic information about the MMU architecture
       for this device. See Section 3.12.4, “MMU Configuration Register (MMUCFG).”

          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                           6-65
Cache and MMU Architecture


       •   TLB configuration registers (TLBnCFG) contain configuration information about each TLB array.
           See Section 3.12.5, “TLB Configuration Registers (TLBnCFG).”
           The TLBnCFG number assignment is the same as the value in MAS0[TLBSEL]. For example,
           TLB0CFG provides configuration information about TLB0, TLB1CFG provides configuration
           information about TLB1, etc.
The MMU configuration information is provided for software to be able to adapt to differing
implementations within the framework of the architecture.




           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
6-66                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor