Chapter 1
Overview
This document describes the programming resources common among those Freescale embedded
processors that implement the Power ISA™ (embedded category) and the Freescale embedded
implementation standards (EIS).
Note that the PowerPC™ architecture, as implemented on e600 and e300 cores, is described in the
Programming Environments Manual for 32-bit Implementations of the PowerPC™ Architecture.
This chapter includes overviews of the following:
   • Power Architecture® Technology and the Freescale Embedded Implementation Standards (EIS)
   • EREF Programming Model
   • Exceptions and Interrupt Handling
   • Memory (Storage) Model
   • Special Instruction Differences Between Book E and EREF

1.1       Power Architecture® Technology and the Freescale Embedded
          Implementation Standards (EIS)
The functionality described in this book was originally defined as the PowerPC Book E architecture and
the Freescale EIS. It is now defined as the resources defined for the Base and Embedded categories by the
Power ISA specification as well as for additional categories. Although the structure of the architecture
specification has changed substantially, the functionality itself is essentially unchanged. The PowerPC
architecture and the Power ISA now make up the Power Architecture technology.

1.1.1        Understanding Differences in the Book E and EREF Specification
             Structures
The reorganization makes the structure of the specification quite different from the PowerPC 1.10, Power
ISA, and Book E architecture specifications.
Book I and Book II have been reorganized and amended, with features largely unchanged from Book E,
the EIS, and IBM’s PowerPC 2.02 specification for server processors. Although Book III-E and Book III-S
still bear a family resemblance to the original PowerPC Book III definition, they differ in very significant
ways both from one another and from the PowerPC 1.10 specification.
The Power ISA definition organizes the specification into shared Books I and II, which largely consists of
the Base category (see Section 1.1.2, “Introducing the Power ISA Category”). Book III-S and Book III-E
describe the resources for the privileged modes of the architecture and, although very similar in general
appearance, contain significant differences. Book III-S is derived from PowerPC 2.02 and describes the


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                   1-1
Overview


privileged modes of the Server environment. Book III-E is derived from an unpublished version of Book
E (which redefined the 64-bit instruction set to be compatible with PowerPC 2.02) and describes the
privileged modes of the Embedded environment.
This figure shows the structure of Power ISA.
                                                       Power ISA

                                 Server Environment
                                 (formerly PowerPC         Embedded Environment
                                 Architecture, 2.02)        (formerly Book E+EIS)


                                  Book I (UISA) restructured and extended
                                                                              Book VLE
                                   Book II (VEA) restructured and extended    (extends
                                                                               Books
                                     Book III-S:             Book III-E:        I–III)
                                 (Category: Server)    (Category: Embedded)

                                               Figure 1-1. Power ISA

1.1.2         Introducing the Power ISA Category
The Power ISA category describes distinct modules within the architecture.

1.1.2.1         Understanding the Base Category
The Base category is common to both Embedded and Server categories, and it was originally derived from
the Book I and Book II of the original PowerPC architecture. As Power ISA has evolved, the Base category
has had features added to make the Base category common to all implementations of Power ISA.

1.1.2.2         Understanding the Embedded and Server Categories
In addition to the Base category, the Embedded and Server categories define functionality restricted to
those respective environments. For example, these two categories include separate Book IIIs. In the Power
ISA, categories also replace the concept of Auxiliary Processing Units (APUs), which were previously
described by Book E and older versions of EREF, as modules of functionality that were extensions to Book
E. In some places, this document continues to use the concept of Auxiliary Processing Units (APUs). In
general, an APU reasonably maps to a category of Power ISA; however, some categories in Power ISA do
not map to APUs. The concept ‘category’ is useful primarily as an arbitrary convention for structuring of
the architecture specification itself; it is not particularly useful in understanding the behavior of the
functionality.

1.1.2.3         Benefits of Categories
Categories extend the Base and Embedded category programming model. The modularity of categories
facilitates the development of resources that are useful to some embedded environments but not others.
Because of the mutually-exclusive nature of such extensions, instructions from multiple categories may be
assigned the same opcode numbers. Such categories are mutually exclusive for a given implementation


           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-2                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                    Overview


unless the implementation provides an implementation-specific method for using one category or the
other.
Categories may consist of any combination of instructions, optional behavior of Power ISA-defined
instructions, registers, register files, fields within Power ISA-defined registers, interrupts, or exception
conditions within Power ISA-defined interrupts.

1.1.3        Power Architecture Evolution
The PowerPC architecture is the grandfather to the latest generation of the Power Architecture technology.
This figure shows the relationship between the different environments.
                                                     Power Architecture

                                                                                     Power ISA

                                                          Server Environment
                        Desktop Environment               (formerly PowerPC               Embedded Environment
                     (PowerPC Architecture 1.10)          Architecture, 2.02)              (formerly Book E/EIS)


          User ISA              Book I                        Book I (UISA) restructured and extended
                                                                                                               Book VLE
              VEA              Book II                        Book II (VEA) restructured and extended
                                                                                                                (extends
              OEA         Book III: (Desktop)                  Book III-S:               Book III-E:           Books I–III)
                                                           (Category: Server)      (Category: Embedded)


                               G2/e300                                                      e500
   Implementations                                                G5                                              e200
                               G4/e600                                                      e200


   Indicates application-level features that have remained unchanged across all environments and versions of the architecture


                                   Figure 1-2. Power Architecture Relationships

The definitions that consist of the Power Architecture technology are as follows:
   • The PowerPC Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) 1.10. The original architecture defined in the
       1990s by Apple, IBM, and Motorola’s Semiconductor Products Sector (SPS) (now Freescale). This
       mature architecture continues to form the basis for developing PowerPC processors that use
       Freescale’s G2, e300, and e600 processor cores. This version of the architecture is described in
       Programming Environments Manual for 32-bit Implementations of the PowerPC™ Architecture.
   • The Power ISA specification. The Power ISA specification brings together the embedded features
       defined in Book E and the Freescale EIS with the server and desktop resources defined by IBM’s
       PowerPC architecture 2.02 definition. This architecture continues to evolve.

1.1.4        Freescale Embedded Implementation Standards (EIS)
The EIS refers to the architecture common to all Freescale embedded devices. It includes the following:


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                   1-3
Overview


      •      Power ISA architecture features defined for the embedded environment
      •      Additional Power ISA features (categories such as Floating-Point, Embedded.Hypervisor,
             Decorated Storage, etc.)
      •      Freescale-specific features that, if implemented, are implemented consistently among Freescale
             embedded devices
Under Book E, programming model extensions took the form of APUs. A few APUs were strictly specific
to individual devices, but most, such as the signal processing engine (SPE) and variable-length encoding
(VLE), were designed to be used by multiple implementations and so were defined as part of the EIS. Most
of the APUs formerly defined by the EIS are now part of the Power ISA (where they are referred to as
categories).
As Figure 1-2 shows, processors designed under the Book E/EIS and PowerPC advanced server 2.02
architectures remain compliant with the restructured Power ISA architecture.

1.1.5                EIS Use of Power ISA Categories
Many features formerly defined by the EIS have become part of the Power ISA. These include Freescale’s
embedded MMU model and many former APUs, such as SPE and VLE. What is new is how these different
architectures have been joined under a new name that reflects the expansive reach of the diversified
architecture. Some of these features, such as the Integer Select instruction (isel), have become part of the
basic programming model (category Base); others that are available to, but not required by, embedded
processors, are defined by the Power ISA as separate categories.
This table provides references for categories described briefly in the EREF.
                                         Table 1-1. References for Related Categories

      Category                              Definition                                              Reference

    Variable length     Variable-length encoding facility, which            The VLE category is implemented in many e200 cores.
    encoding (VLE)      re-encodes some of the basic instruction set to fit The VLE category in Power ISA is specified in Book VLE.
                        into 16-bit and 32-bit instructions.

Signal processing A comprehensive set of 64-bit, two-element,                The SPE category extends Book III–defined features, in
  engine (SPE)    SIMD instructions that share the Book I–defined            particular, the interrupt model.
                  GPRs extended by the SPE to 64 bits in 32-bit              The EREF provides an overview of the SPE, but a full
                  implementations, as shown in Figure 1-3.                   description is provided in the SPE PEM.

          Altivec1      This comprehensive 128-bit, four-operand SIMD        The vector category extends the Book III interrupt model.
                        ISA consists of instructions, a set of 32, 128-bit   For more information, see the AltiVec PEM.
                        vector registers (vRs), the vector save register
                        (VRSAVE), and the vector status and control
                        register (VSCR), which is analogous to the
                        FPSCR.

Note:
1
    AltiVec technology was introduced in 1998 as an extension to (but not formally a part of) the PowerPC architecture.

This figure provides an illustration of the GPRs extended by the SPE to 64 bits in 32-bit implementations.




              EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-4                                                                                                         Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                                  Overview


                                                 NOTE
                 The SPE defines three dependent Embedded Float categories:
                 •       Embedded Float Scalar Double:
                         GPR-based floating-point double-precision
                 •       Embedded Float Scalar Single:
                         GPR-based floating-point single-precision
                 •       Embedded Float Vector:
                         GPR-based floating-point vector single-precision
                     0        31    32      63
                         (upper) GPR0 (lower)
                                GPR1             General-purpose registers (The base category defines only the lower half (bits
                                GPR2             32-63) for 32-bit implementations.
                               • • •             (The 64-bit category defines the GPRs as single-element, 64-bit GPRs.)

                               GPR31
                                                 The signal processing engine category defines the upper 32 bits of the GPRs
                                                 for use with 64-bit operands

                     Figure 1-3. Extended GPRs as Implemented to Support SPE Instructions

Freescale processors compliant with EREF implement several categories; although, in some instances,
implementations may not support all instructions, instruction variants, registers, or other parts of the
architectural definition of the category in Power ISA. This is because:
    • Power ISA continues to evolve. New versions of the architecture may contain additions to existing
        categories; Freescale cores were implemented to conform to earlier versions of Power ISA.
    • The EIS may designate that some features of Power ISA categories are not implemented by
        Freescale cores. Features of Power ISA categories that are not defined in the EREF, but appear in
        Power ISA, are examples of this.

1.1.5.1        Category Designations in EIS
In this document, category designations appear between angled brackets. Text associated with the
designation applies only if the processor implements the category, or the category abbreviation, inside the
angled brackets. Category designations appear in other places in the document as well, and are
documented accordingly; for example, instruction definitions contain a category definition. Any
definitions or descriptions that appear in this document and have a category designation are considered
part of the Base category, or as overall descriptions of the architecture itself.

1.1.5.1.1        Category Designation Considerations
The following example of a category indicates that the sentence applies only to category 64-bit and to
processors that implement that category:
   • The upper 32 bits of the register are set to 0. <64-bit>
When a category designation appears at the end of a section title (for example, “2.8.3 External Proxy
Register <EXP>”), this means the category designation applies to the entire section (or chapter, if the
category designation appears at the end of a chapter title).


          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                                1-5
Overview


When a category designation appears on a separate line, preceding a paragraph, this means that the
category designation applies to the paragraph that follows. The following example illustrates this point:
    • <Embedded.Hypervisor>:
       If the processor is in the guest supervisor state...
When a category designation appears inside a sentence or phrase (for example, “SPE <SP>/embedded
floating-point <SP.FD,SP.FV>/vector unavailable interrupt <V>,” this means the category designation
applies to the previous word or clause.

1.1.5.2         Categories Supported by All Freescale EIS Processors
All EREF-compliant Freescale processors implement at least the following categories from Power ISA
2.06:
    • Base
    • Embedded
    • Cache Specification
In addition to these categories, other features that are not associated with a category but appear in this
document are also assumed to be implemented by processors compliant with EREF.

1.1.5.3         Categories Supported by Some Freescale EIS Processors
Many Freescale processors implement additional categories to provide additional functionality or
acceleration capabilities that are useful for a given solution space, but which may not be applicable to all
solution spaces. While these categories may be considered “optional,” many processors share a common
subset of these categories. The mix of supported categories also occurs because the architecture evolves,
and processor cores developed prior to a new version of the architecture may not contain a category
developed as part of the new architecture version. In general, Power ISA introduces new functionality as
categories, and, in later versions, moves them to Base, if so warranted.
Pieces of the architecture that are not part of a non-Base category may be implemented optionally on a
given processor. Text that describes the feature indicates whether or not it is optional.
                                                    NOTE
                  Power ISA also defines the Embedded category, reflecting the embedded
                  environment of Power ISA. The Embedded category is assumed by EIS and
                  is considered to be the same as Base.




           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-6                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                          Overview


1.1.5.3.1       PowerISA Category Abbreviations and Acronyms
This table shows PowerISA categories, and their associated abbreviations, which are considered to be a
part of EREF and appear on some Freescale processors.
                          Table 1-2. PowerISA Category Abbreviations and Acronyms

                Acronym                                    PowerISA Category

                   ATB       Alternate Time Base

                   DS        Decorated Storage

                  E.DC       Embedded.Device Control

                  E.ED       Embedded.Enhanced Debug

                  E.PD       Embedded.External PID

                  E.HV       Embedded.Hypervisor

                  E.LE       Embedded.Little-Endian

                  E.PM       Embedded.Performance Monitor

                  E.PC       Embedded.Processor Control

                  E.CL       Embedded.Cache Locking

                   EXP       External Proxy

                   FP        Floating-Point

                   FP.R      Floating-Point.Record

                   SP        SPE

                  SP.FD      SPE.Embedded Float Scalar Double

                  SP.FS      SPE.Embedded Float Scalar Single

                  SP.FV      SPE.Embedded Float Vector

                   VLE       Variable Length Encoding

                    V        Vector

                   WT        Wait

                    64       64-bit


1.1.5.3.2       EIS Category Abbreviations and Acronyms
EIS includes categories that are not defined by PowerISA. The previous version of EIS called these
Auxiliary Processing Units (APUs).
This table shows categories defined only by EIS.
                            Table 1-3. EIS Category Abbreviations and Acronyms

                             Acronym                          EIS Category

                                DCF           Direct Cache Flush

                                CWP           Cache Way Partitioning


         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        1-7
Overview


                       Table 1-3. EIS Category Abbreviations and Acronyms (continued)

                               Acronym                      EIS Category

                                 DEO       Data Cache Block Extended Operations

                                  ER       Enhanced Reservations

                                 WS        Write Shadow Mode

                                  CS       Cache Stashing


1.1.5.4         Categories Not Supported by Freescale EIS Processors
Some categories present in Power ISA are not part of EREF and are not implemented on Freescale devices.
The following categories defined by Power ISA 2.06 are not part of EREF:
   • Server (and any dependent categories)
   • Decimal Floating-Point
   • Embedded.Cache.Debug
   • Embedded.Cache.Initialization
   • Embedded.Hypervisor.LRAT
   • Embedded.Multi-Threading
   • Embedded.Page Table
   • Embedded.TLB Write Conditional
   • Legacy Integer Multiply-Accumulate
   • Legacy Move Assist
   • Load/Store Quadword
   • Move Assist
   • Processor Compatibility
   • Stream
   • Strong Access Order
   • Trace
   • Vector-Scalar Extension
   • Vector.Little Endian

1.1.6         Special Instruction Differences Between Book E and EREF
Some instructions present in Book E have had their definition altered slightly from the Book E
specification in order to effectively merge these instructions in to Power ISA. In particular, the following
changes occurred:
   • The Book E–defined msync instruction has reverted to being the Synchronize instruction sync
        defined by the PowerPC architecture. In the embedded category, msync is a simplified mnemonic
        for the sync instruction to ensure compatibility with the Book E msync. The instruction encoding
        remains the same, and the semantics of sync (without operands) remains the same. The mbar


           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-8                                                                                        Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                          Overview


        instruction, defined in Book E, remains as part of the embedded category; the equivalent PowerPC
        architecture 1.10 instruction eieio, which shares the opcode, is defined as part of the Server
        category.
    •   The CT field in the dcbt and dcbtst instructions is now renamed as the TH field. The semantic of
        the field remains the same for values less than 8, which is a cache identifier. Category Stream,
        which is not supported in EREF, uses values of the TH field which are 8 or greater.

1.2       EREF Programming Model

1.2.1        RISC Architecture Overview
Power Architecture processors are fundamentally a classic load/store RISC architecture. In general, such
RISC architectures have fixed-width instruction length, and contain a substantial number of selectable
registers to provide inputs and outputs of computations. The instructions that are defined are generally less
complex, with the expectation that those instructions can be implemented simply, and that the
implementation will more easily be able to execute instructions out of order, resulting in an
implementation that is smaller, lower in power usage, and less complex.
The programming model of EREF follows accordingly. Memory accesses load or store data to/from
memory via registers. Computation instructions use the data in registers as inputs to the computation and
produce results that are placed in another register. In general, a single instruction does not perform
computation and memory operations with the exception that in some forms of loads and stores (those with
“Update” forms), the effective address computed in the instruction is also placed into another register.

1.2.2        EIS Architecture Overview
EIS is defined as a 64-bit architecture which allows for 32-bit and 64-bit implementations. 64-bit
implementations can run software in either 64-bit mode or 32-bit mode and can easily handle running a
mix of both 32-bit and 64-bit contexts when controlled by an appropriately designed operating system or
hypervisor. It is not possible to run a 64-bit context from an operating system or hypervisor which is
running in 32-bit mode. Registers in EIS are defined using 64-bit numbering, even though 32-bit
implementations use bits 32–63 of such registers. Instructions use 32-bit numbering since instructions are
at most 32 bits long (all instructions are exactly 32 bits except for some VLE mode instructions which are
16 bits).
A more complete discussion of 32-bit and 64-bit modes is presented in Chapter 2, “Computation Modes.”

1.2.3        Privilege Model
EIS provides three privilege levels to provide different levels of protection for software to operate under.
This allows software to efficiently build systems that provide partitioning, virtualization environments,
and protection.
This table provides privilege level definitions.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                        1-9
Overview


                                            Table 1-4. Privilege Level Definitions

         State                                   Definition                                               Use

   Hypervisor state      This is the highest privilege level; it has access to all   The hypervisor state is used to provide
                         instructions and resources. Also called “hypervisor         partitioning and virtualization for operating
                         privileged,” “hypervisor mode,” or “hypervisor.”            systems software, which runs as a guest to the
                                                                                     hypervisor software.

Guest supervisor state This is the supervisor state at which operating systems The guest supervisor state is allowed to
                       which are hosted by a hypervisor run. Also called the   perform several privileged operations, and
                       “guest supervisor,” or “supervisor mode.”               access any resources that are not hypervisor
                                                                               privileged.

       User state        This is the unprivileged state in which a program runs The vast majority of instructions are allowed in
                         under the control of an operating system. Also called   the user state.
                         user mode, user, or in Power ISA, called problem state.


1.2.3.1             Hypervisor State Considerations
A software program running in the hypervisor state that is hosting guests in a partitioned environment is
called a hypervisor. The hypervisor program partitions the system among guest operating systems and
manages any shared state between the guests in such a manner that prevents the guests from interfering
with each other. The way in which the hypervisor implements policy decisions with regard to managing
these shared resources determines the amount of interferance that can occur between guests.
When the Embedded.Hypervisor category is implemented, the hypervisor state can run a guest operating
system in guest supervisor state (see Section 1.2.3.2, “Guest Supervisor State Considerations”). If the
Embedded.Hypervisor category is not implemented on a core, the operating system software runs in the
equivalent of hypervisor state, and there is no guest supervisor state. Even when the Embedded.Hypervisor
category is implemented, it is still practical to run an operating system in hypervisor state. This is termed
running an operating system on “bare metal.” The programming model of running an operating system
bare metal on a core that implements the Embedded.Hypervisor category is the same as if the category is
not implemented.

1.2.3.2             Guest Supervisor State Considerations
Attempting to access hypervisor privileged resources and instructions will cause embedded hypervisor
privilege interrupts which the hypervisor can service on behalf of the guest to provide appropriate
emulation. What programming model the guest supervisor state should use depends on how the hypervisor
is implemented. In general it is practical for the hypervisor to implement the same model (or a model very
similar to) the programming model of running the guest operating system on bare metal.

1.2.3.3             User State Considerations
                                                       NOTE
                     Attempting to access hypervisor or guest supervisor resources or
                     instructions causes privilege exceptions, which the operating system can
                     handle appropriately.



           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-10                                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                           Overview


There is no difference in user state privilege when the user state program is running under control of an
operating system hosted as a guest to a hypervisor, running under control of a hypervisor, or running under
control of an operating system which is running bare metal. The cases differ only in the manner in which
some interrupts are directed when the user state program attempts to access a privileged resource. In each
case, the interrupts are directed to the state that controls the user state program or to the hypervisor state.

1.2.4        Instruction Model
Except for category VLE, which describes a variable length set of instructions, the instruction set contains
the following features:
    • Instructions are 32 bits in length and contain a primary opcode in the first six bits. Instructions are
        described using 32-bit numbering. For most primary opcode values, bits 21–30 contain the
        secondary opcode. Instructions which encode large immediate values generally occupy a single
        primary opcode, and use bits 16–31 to provide a signed or unsigned immediate field.
    • Most computational instructions are triadic (that is, they contain three register operands). One of
        the register operands specifies a destination or target (where the output of the computation is
        placed). The other register operands specify inputs to the computation.
Chapter 4, “Instruction Model” details how instructions operate and briefly presents the instruction set
organized by function. The major sections are:
   • Section 4.1, “Operand Conventions”
   • Section 4.2, “Instruction Set Characteristics”
   • Section 4.3, “Classes of Instructions”
   • Section 4.4, “Forms of Defined Instructions”
   • Section 4.5, “Instruction-Related Exceptions”
   • Section 4.6, “Instruction Summary”
   • Section 4.7, “Instruction Listing”
Full descriptions of each instruction, including opcode, syntax, affected registers, related interrupts, and
RTL (register transfer language) are provided in Chapter 5, “Instruction Set”; such descriptions for the
VLE, SPE, and AltiVec instructions are provided in their respective programming environments manuals
(PEMs).

1.2.4.1        VLE Instruction Set Overview
The VLE instruction set is decoded when the processor is in VLE mode. VLE mode is provided by cores
that implement category VLE. VLE instructions are variable length and provide a significant improvement
in code density over the standard instruction set, with an increase in code path length. VLE mode is
generally only implemented on cores that are targeted for markets where code density is important.

1.2.4.2        VLE Instruction Set Features
The VLE instruction set contains the following features:



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       1-11
Overview


       •   Instructions are 16-bit or 32-bit in length and instruction decoding is more dynamic in how fields
           are interpreted.
       •   Instructions from primary opcode 4 and 31 in the standard instruction set decode the same for the
           VLE instruction set, making all the instructions in those two primary opcodes available in VLE
           mode. Note that opcode 4 is used for category SPE instructions as well as category Vector (Altivec)
           instructions.
       •   Most instructions are dyadic (that is, they contain two register operands). One of the operands
           specifies a register as both the destination or target as well as one of the inputs.
       •   Not all of the registers that are available in the standard instruction set are available to be used for
           all VLE instructions (that is, some VLE instructions cannot address all of the 32 General Purpose
           Registers).
       •   Since VLE instructions can be placed on 16-bit boundaries, the core is capable of branching to a
           16-bit boundary.

1.2.5          Register Model
This section summarizes architecture-defined registers implemented by Freescale embedded devices.
                                                     NOTE
                   Not all registers are implemented by all processor cores. Whether a register
                   is implemented depends on what architectural categories the core
                   implements, and what version of the architecture that the core implements.
The sets of registers that are provided are briefly shown in this table.
                                           Table 1-5. Register sets in EIS

Register                                 Bits per
                 Category       Number                                              Description
  Set                                    Register

  GPR              Base           32     32 or 64   General Purpose Registers. The primary register set. GPRs are used for
                                                    a variety of functions including load/store, arithmetic, logical, and address
                                                    calculation operations. Some categories (SPE.Embedded Floating Point *)
                                                    also make use of floating-point data. The number of bits per register are
                                                    64-bits if the implementation is a 64-bit implementation or if category SPE
                                                    is implemented. Otherwise, the number of bits per register is 32. See
                                                    Section 3.3.1, “General-Purpose Registers (GPRs).”

   CR              Base           1        32       Condition Register. The condition register is a single 32-bit register,
                                                    however it is generally used as a set of eight condition register fields (CRn)
                                                    of four bits each. Condition register bits are used by conditional branch
                                                    instructions to determine if a branch is to be taken (or used for the isel
                                                    instruction which input register is to be written to the target register).
                                                    Condition register fields or bits can be set by compare instructions,
                                                    condition register logical instructions, or as the result of a record form
                                                    (instruction mnemonic ending with “.’). See Section 3.5.1, “Condition
                                                    Register (CR).”

  FPR          Floating Point     32       64       Floating Point Registers. FPRs are used in a variety of functions on floating
  <FP>                                              point data including load/store, arithmetic, and logical operations.See
                                                    Section 3.4.1, “Floating-Point Registers (FPR0–FPR31).”




           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-12                                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                        Overview


                                        Table 1-5. Register sets in EIS (continued)

Register                                   Bits per
                Category         Number                                              Description
  Set                                      Register

   VR         Vector (Altivec)     32        128      Vector Registers. VRs are used for a variety of functions for processing
   <V>                                                SIMD vector elements. VRs can contain floating point data, integer data,
                                                      and more. See the AltiVec PEM.

  SPR               —             1024     32 or 64   Special Purpose Registers. SPRs are used for controlling a variety of
                                                      functions. A few of the SPRs are available to user mode (such as Link
                                                      Register, Count Register, Integer Exception Register), however the large
                                                      majority of them are used by supervisor and hypervisor mode to control
                                                      various aspects of the processor. SPRs are accessed with mfspr and
                                                      mtspr instructions. See Section 3.2.2, “Special-Purpose Registers
                                                      (SPRs).”

  PMR          Embedded.          1024        32      Performance Monitor Registers. PMRs are used for controlling the
 <E.PM>        Performance                            performance monitor facility which includes control functions and event
                 Monitor                              counts. Changing the control functions is restricted to supervisor and
                                                      hypervisor mode however some of the registers can be read in user mode.
                                                      PMRs are accessed with mfpmr and mtpmr instructions. See
                                                      Section 3.15.4, “Performance Monitor Counter Registers
                                                      (PMCn/UPMCn).”

  DCR          Embedded.          1024        32      Device Control Registers. DCRs are registers that exist architecturally
 <E.DC>       Device Control                          outside the processor and are thus not part of the processor architecture.
                                                      DCRs are implementation specific and defined in the core reference
                                                      manual that implements them. DCRs are accessed with mfdcr and mtdcr
                                                      instructions. See Section 3.18, “Device Control Registers (DCRs).”
individual          —              —       32 or 64   Individual registers are not a register set, but represent a few registers
 registers                                            which are similar in nature to SPRs, but have specific instructions defined
                                                      to access them. Such register include Machine State Register (MSR),
                                                      Floating-Point Status and Control Register (FPSCR), Accumulator (ACC),
                                                      and Vector Status and Control Register (VSCR).


1.2.6         Exceptions and Interrupt Handling
The following sections define the interrupt model, including an overview of exception handling as
implemented in Freescale embedded devices, a brief description of the exception classes, and an overview
of the registers involved.

1.2.6.1         Understanding Exceptions
In general, interrupt processing occurs as a result of an exception condition existing in the processor. An
exception condition occurs when certain external signals are presented, when error conditions are detected,
or program execution problems are encountered. More than one exception condition may be present during
execution of a given instruction, and an exception priority mechanism exists to determine the highest
priority exception condition that can cause an interrupt.




           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                     1-13
Overview


1.2.6.2           Interrupts Overview
When an exception is detected, and the exception condition has an interrupt enable associated with it or
the exception condition does not require an associated interrupt enable, and it is the highest priority
exception condition, the processor takes an interrupt. The interrupt causes the critical state of the processor
to be saved into appropriate save/restore registers and redirects execution of the processor to the interrupt
vector associated with the interrupt and changes the critical machine state so that it is appropriate for
executing the interrupt handler.

1.2.6.2.1           Understanding the Four Levels of Interrupts
There are four levels of interrupts; the levels determine which set of save/restore registers the critical state
is saved to when the interrupt occurs. The levels are somewhat hierarchical since an interrupt at a “higher”
level will automatically set critical machine state so that asynchronous interrupts of a “lower” level are
disabled. Synchronous exceptions are not disabled by critical machine state and can occur if problems
occur doing instruction execution. System software is responsible for ensuring that no such conditions
occur until it has safely saved any necessary state before executing instructions that might generate
synchronous exceptions.
This table provides the four levels of interrupts from low to high.
                                              Table 1-6. Four Levels of Interrupts

     Interrupt Level         Registers Used                                      Used to handle...

Standard, non-critical Save and restore           Standard interrupts are used to handle most synchronous program exception
     interrupts        registers                  conditions. Standard interrupts are also used to handle the asynchronous
                       (SRR0/SRR1)1               external input exception, programmable asynchronous timer exceptions, and
                                                  asynchronous doorbell exceptions. Standard interrupts which are
                                                  asynchronous are enabled or disabled based on the state of the EE bit in the
                                                  Machine State Register (MSR).

    Critical interrupts   Critical save and       Critical interrupts are used to handle the asynchronous critical input exception,
                          restore registers       the watchdog timer exceptions, and critical asynchronous doorbell exceptions.
                          (CSRR0/CSRR1)           Critical interrupts that are asynchronous are enabled or disabled based on the
                                                  state of the CE bit in the Machine State Register (MSR). Critical interrupts are
                                                  also used to handle synchronous and asynchronous debug program exception
                                                  conditions if category Embedded.Enhanced Debug is not implemented.

    Debug interrupts      Debug save and          Debug interrupts are used to handle synchronous and asynchronous debug
                          restore registers       program exception conditions when category Embedded.Enhanced Debug is
                          (DSRR0/DSRR1)           implemented. Debug interrupts are enabled or disabled based on the state of
                                                  the DE bit in the Machine State Register (MSR). <E.ED>

     Machine check        Machine check save      Machine check interrupts are used to handle synchronous program exception
       interrupts         and restore registers   conditions (called Error Reports) that are detected during execution of an
                          (MCSRR0/MCSRR1)         instruction. Machine check interrupts are also used to handle the asynchronous
                                                  machine check exception and the asynchronous non-maskable interrupt
                                                  exception. Machine check interrupts resulting from asynchronous machine
                                                  check exceptions are enabled or disabled based on the state of the ME bit in
                                                  the Machine State Register (MSR).

Note:
1   For guest operating systems operating under control of a hypervisor, separate guest save and restore registers are provided
    (GSRR0/GSRR1).


           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-14                                                                                                     Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                                    Overview


1.2.6.2.2        Interrupt Handling
Once the interrupt handler is executing, the handler may need to check one or more bits in the exception
syndrome register (ESR) or in other status and control registers to diagnose the cause of the exception and
take appropriate action.
Integrated devices also define error detection, enabling, and reporting bits that the handler would need to
read to determine specific sources of asynchronous interrupts, which are typically reported as external
input, critical input, or machine check interrupts. Often these fields are implemented in memory-mapped
registers and are described in the documentation for the integrated device.
When an interrupt handler completes its execution, it normally returns to the context that it interrupted by
way of a return from interrupt instruction (rfi, rfgi <E.HV>, rfci, rfdi <E.ED>, or rfmci), which returns
execution to the interrupted address and returns the critical machine state to its previous pre-interrupt state.
The interrupts are described in Section Chapter 7, “Interrupts and Exceptions.”

1.2.7        Memory (Storage) Model

1.2.7.1         Memory Addresses
An address is required to access locations in storage (memory).
This table provides the four different types of memory addresses defined by the architecture.
                                    Table 1-7. Four Types of Memory Addresses

Address Type                                         Definition                                              Used...

   Effective     EAs are generated by load, store, cache management, and other instructions. An EA By software to specify
 address (EA)    is also generated by branch instructions and the sequential execution of instruction locations in the memory
                 (that is, the next instruction to be executed or the address of an instruction). The vast map.
                 majority of software deals only with EAs. EAs are transformed by the processor into
                 other types of addresses through address translation in the memory management
                 unit. The memory management unit is normally maintained by the operating system
                 and/or the hypervisor. EAs are either 32 bits in 32-bit mode, or 64 bits in 64-bit mode.

Virtual Address A VA is formed by taking an EA and adding address space information from the          To find matching
      (VA)      Machine State Register (MSR[IS,DS], MSR[GS] <E.HV>), the Processes ID                 translations in the
                Registers (PIDn), and the Logical Partition ID Register (LPIDR) <E.HV>. The           memory management
                address space information is maintained by the operating system and the hypervisor.   unit.
                In general, a unique address space is provided for each process or task performed
                by the operating system. The hypervisor also provides unique address spaces
                between logical partitions.




          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                                 1-15
Overview


                             Table 1-7. Four Types of Memory Addresses (continued)

Address Type                                         Definition                                                 Used...

Logical Address LAs apply only to processors that implement logical partitioning (category E.HV).       By the guest operating
     (LA)       The hypervisor or a Logical to Real Address Translation <E.HV.LRAT> translates the      system as a real
                LA into the appropriate real address. A guest operating system is unaware of what       address. These
                its true real addresses are. LAs are always translated to RAs at the time when a TLB    addresses are normally
                entry is written.                                                                       specified when the guest
                                                                                                        operating system
                                                                                                        attempts to write
                                                                                                        translation lookaside
                                                                                                        buffer (TLB) entries.

 Real Address    An RA is the actual physical address that is used when the processor performs          To access a location in
     (RA)        transactions. The RA is normally formed when a VA is translated by the memory          the caches, or to access
                 management unit. The system interconnect may also provide its own translation of       a storage location
                 RA to RA; however, these translations are outside the scope of the processor           managed outside the
                 architecture.                                                                          processor (for example
                                                                                                        DRAM, a peripheral
                                                                                                        device, and so on) by
                                                                                                        sending it out on the
                                                                                                        system interconnect.


1.2.7.2         Weakly Ordered Memory
To optimize performance, the architecture supports weakly ordered references to memory. On a single
processor, references to memory always appear to occur in program order. However, when memory is
shared between multiple processors or between a processor and a device, memory accesses may not occur
in program order. Thus, software must manage the order and synchronization of memory accesses to
ensure proper execution when memory is shared between multiple processors or devices. The cache and
data memory control attributes, along with the Synchronize (sync) and Memory Barrier (mbar)
instructions, provide the required controls.

1.2.7.3         Memory Management
The architecture supports demand-paged virtual memory as well other memory management schemes that
depend on precise control of effective-to-physical address translation and flexible memory protection. The
mapping mechanism consists of software-managed unified (translate both instruction and data references)
TLBs that support variable-sized pages with per-page properties and permissions.

1.2.7.3.1         Optional TLB Properties
Some of the properties that can be configured for each TLB are as follows:
   • User-mode page execute, read, and write access
   • Supervisor-mode page execute, read, write access
   • Hypervisor or guest address space <E.HV>
   • Logical partition ID <E.HV>
   • Process ID
   • Virtualization Fault <E.HV>

           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-16                                                                                                   Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                           Overview


    •   Write-through required (W)
    •   Caching inhibited (I)
    •   Memory coherency required (M)
    •   Guarded (G)
    •   Endianness (E) (big endian or little endian)
    •   VLE mode <VLE>
    •   User-definable (U0–U3), a 4-bit implementation-specific field

1.2.7.3.2        How the Architecture Benefits Memory Management
The architecture provides the ability to have distinct address spaces between user processes, user and
supervisor, logical partitions, and hypervisor state. The wealth of address spaces and the complete
separation of address spaces provide flexibility for system software as well as an extra level of protection
between differing software domains. To facilitate efficient accesses between address spaces, External
Process ID (PID) instructions are provided for hypervisors and operating systems to perform storage and
memory operations using another address space to perform translation and protection.
The architecture provides no ability for software to run in a “real mode,” in which effective address are
used as real addresses. The requirement that all addresses are translated simplifies implementation and
provides a strong foundation for partitioning and protection since the state of the MMU guarantees what
real address the processor may access.
In addition, processors that implement the Embedded.Hypervisor category are provided with methods of
hiding and translating real addresses specified by the guest (called logical addresses) into true real
addresses.

1.2.7.4        Caches
The architecture supports a variety of cache models including split instruction and data (Harvard) with data
caches that are kept coherent by hardware and instruction caches that are kept coherent through software
coherency. Different levels of caches can be implemented, and the instruction set includes the ability to
reference those cache directly for operations such as touch loads and cache locking.
Caches have a set of configuration SPRs for system software to understand the geometry and other aspects
of cache operations. Also control and status SPRs are provided for software to configure the caches and
perform maintenance and control operations.
Instructions are provided for performing cache block (line) operations such as locking, flushing,
invalidating, and zeroing a specific block.

1.3         Timers
Several timers and timer functions are provided by the architecture. Most of the timers are driven by the
time base, a 64-bit counter driven by an implementation clock or frequency. The time base can be accessed
by software through SPRs.



          EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                       1-17
Overview


Timers that are driven by the time base clock are as follows:
   • Decrementer (DEC register). The decrementer is a 32-bit counter that counts down. The
       decrementer can be programmed to cause an interrupt to occur when the decrementer counts down
       to 0. Typically, software programs the DEC register with the number of time base ticks to elapse
       before the timer expires and an interrupt occurs. The decrementer also has an auto reload feature
       which will reload the DEC register from the Decrementer Auto Reload (DECAR) register when
       the counter expires.
   • Fixed interval timer
   • Watchdog timer
The architecture also provides an alternate time base, another 64-bit counter which is also driven by an
implementation dependent frequency. In general, the time base and the alternate time base will increment
on a different frequency. It is customary, but not required by the architecture for the alternate time base to
be based on the processor clock frequency and the time base based on a frequency supplied external to the
processor core.

1.4         Debug
The architecture provides a set of debug capabilities that can be utilized by an operating system,
hypervisor, or debug agent running with supervisor or hypervisor privileges. The debug facility allows
control of program execution for operations such as single-step, instruction address breakpoint, data access
breakpoint, branch taken, and more. The architecture also supports basic integration with an external
debugger (a debugger that operates independent of the processor). EIS does not define external debugger
controls; EIS acknowledges the existence of external debugger controls, and provides a method for
software to know when the processor is controlled by an external debugger.

1.5         Performance Monitoring
Performance monitoring supports counting of events such as processor clocks, instruction cache misses,
data cache misses, mispredicted branches, and others. The count of these events may be configured to
trigger a performance monitor interrupt.
The register set associated with performance monitoring consists of counter registers, a global control
register, and local control registers implemented as performance monitor registers (PMRs) which are
similar to SPRs. PMRs are read/write from supervisor mode, and each register is reflected to a
corresponding read-only register for user mode. The mtpmr and mfpmr instructions move data to and
from these registers.
For more information on performance monitoring, see Chapter 10, “Performance Monitor <E.PM>.”

1.6         Major Additions to this Revision
This version of EREF contains several additions to support the efficient use of multicore devices. It
includes the following major additions:
    • Support for secure partitioning and virtualization through a hypervisor privilege level. Features of
       the hypervisor privilege level are considered category Embedded.Hypervisor.

           EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
1-18                                                                                       Freescale Semiconductor
                                                                                                          Overview


    •   Full definition of EREF as a 64-bit architecture.
    •   Another level of interrupts for debug interrupts, with the associated save/restore register pair and
        rfdi (return from debug interrupt) instructions.
    •   Topology independent processor-to-processor doorbell messages (interrupts) allowing one
        processor to send interrupts to other processors in the same coherence domain. This is considered
        category Embedded.Processor Control.
    •   The ability for privileged software to perform load and store operations using a specified address
        space for the translation and permissions. This allows privileged software to use virtual addresses
        from their processes (or guests). This is considered category Embedded.External PID.
    •   The ability to perform load and store operations with addresses associated with a device and pass
        decorations (meta data) about the transaction to the device which can then perform device unique
        semantics based on the decoration. This is considered category Decorated Storage. Some
        integrated devices use this to efficiently perform atomic updates to memory.
    •   Support for integrated backside private or shared L2 caches.




         EREF 2.0: A Programmer’s Reference Manual for Freescale Power Architecture® Processors, Rev. 0
Freescale Semiconductor                                                                                      1-19